---
layout: narrative
title: Response 1
author: Allison Naganuma
date: 26 September 2019
---
	Art has nothing to do with representation, but with action...action that can interfere with real life and not representation of life...art has to do with life and at that moment, we thought that life was not in museums, but in the streets...Life was very difficult at that moment. The censorship and repression was [strong]. I felt this violence on my body, and I wanted to make the audience...not tell [them] about that, not inform [them], but to make them feel this violence.
	-	Graciela Carnevale, 2012

In 1968, Graciela Carnevale showcased a politically-motivated piece, Acción del Encierro (Confinement Action), as a part of the Ciclo de Arte Experimental exhibition in Rosario. Through this work, Carnevale aimed to provoke her audience members to discover and employ their personal, physical agency under oppressive conditions though an act of “exemplary violence.” Acción del Encierro can help us understand how to address current social problems, namely the global environmental crisis, because it provides us with a concrete method of inspiring collective action in individuals who might otherwise be complicit, paralyzed, and hopeless in the face of daunting circumstances. This response aims to briefly review Carnevale’s strategic model and political goals for Acción del Encierro, the ways in which this piece problematizes traditional avant-garde art, its possibility for supporting the environmental movement, and its social impact potential.

In order to comprehend Carnevale’s strategic model and goals for Acción del Encierro, it is essential to understand the political context in which this work took place. In 1966, General Juan Carlos Onganía seized power in Argentina through a coup d'etat, overthrowing the elected president, Arturo Illia. When protests broke out at the University of Buenos Aires, Onganía’s police force violently suppressed the protestors through beatings and jailings. The context of repression, censorship, state violence, dictatorship, and class struggle provided the impetus for Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro.

Acción del Encierro was comprised of a minimal room with a glass wall covered in posters. These posters featured an image of Carnevale in the center, surrounded by a frame of text which provided the exhibit’s name, date, and location, as well as Carnevale’s full name. Carnevale led the audience members into the room and then locked them inside. This confinement, Carnevale believed, would force the viewers to experience, to physically feel in their bodies, an attenuated version of the oppression they felt under Onganía’s regime. The only way to escape the room would be for the audience members to break the glass, freeing themselves from their confinement through a shocking act of “exemplary violence.” Quite literally breaking the barrier between the art gallery and the political world outside, this violence would parallel the personal agency and collective liberation Carnevale hoped to witness during a revolution under Onganía. As Professor Grant Kester writes, “The struggle to break free of physical confinement was presumed to exist in a corollary relationship with the struggle against political repression.” Despite these intentions, a sympathetic passerby outside of the galley shattered the glass for the trapped audience members, departing from Carnevale’s original vision.

Kester writes that Carnevale’s work draws on the ideas of revolutionary theorists, namely Vladmir Lenin and Régis Debray, who argue that an enlightened and strategically focused vanguard party or foco (an independent guerrilla unit) must bring about consciousness among the proletariat in order to lead a revolution against the oppressive class. Lenin believed that the working class, independently, is incapable of organizing a revolution not because they are unaware of their oppression, but because they only recognize injustice working on the individual level or because their current circumstances are not dire enough to elicit a revolution. For this reason, a vanguard party or foco that understands the inner-workings of the capitalist system must theorize a strategy for revolution and then direct the energy of the working class to carry out that plan. Lenin believed the challenge of the vanguard party was two-fold. First, the party needed to reveal the systemic nature of the capitalist system. Then, the party needed to provoke the oppressive class in order to exacerbate the proletariat’s oppression and galvanize them into revolutionary, radicalized action. For Debray, the two modes of foquista action were to motivate the proletariat through their own self-discipline and sacrifice and to tirelessly attack the oppressor’s military forces. There are clear overlaps between Lenin and Debray’s revolutionary theories, which argue for the necessity of an enlightened subgroup to mobilize the masses, using pedagogy and strategic violence.

Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro closely resembles Debray’s theorized actions of the foquista. Her work combines the pedagogical and violent strategies of the foco by making the viewers physically aware of their incarceration, forcing them to act out in violence to free themselves from their oppression. As Kester writes, “Carnevale herself becomes the foquista militant, declaring war on the consciousness of the incarcerated viewer.” In other words, she redirects violence, which would normally be focused on the military dictatorship, towards the audience members, therefore forcing them out of their complacency and complicity. By inciting this “exemplary violence” in her audience, she hoped that Acción del Encierro would “penetrate the consciousness” of her audience members and “reveal the contradictions” within society. She aimed to “provoke [them] into an awareness of the power with which violence is enacted in everyday life.”

Maintaining some of the hallmarks of conventional avant-garde art, Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro uses aesthetics to expose and challenge the audience member’s preconceived notions of power and resistance. Kester says Carnevale’s work is a “more general re-affirmation of aesthetic conventions that define avant-garde art as a form of aggressive disruption intended to increase the viewer’s awareness of his or her own culpability in dominant forms of power.” She brings her audience into Acción del Encierro with the intention of enlightening them and leading them, playing a didactic role. Kester notes that this teacher-student relationship and the idea that art is an opportunity for “punishment and remediation” have been strongholds in the realm of avant-garde art for over a century. Carnevale’s work maintains the pedagogical aims of avant-garde work.

While Carnevale enforces the pedagogical roots of avant-garde art, she also challenges this approach in that she develops a pointed pedagogical aim and political message she wants to communicate to her viewers: their agency exists and it is needed to resist Oganía’s regime. Conventional avant-garde art, in contrast, has a much broader and open-ended pedagogical aim. Using formal changes and experimentation to elicit shock in the viewer, conventional pieces compel the audience to re-evaluate their perspectives on societal norms, values, and power structures. While Carnevale hopes to produce a specific reaction or thought-process in her audience members, conventional avant-garde art hopes to remain opaque, incomprehensible, and anti-discursive, spurring a variety of reactions from its viewers. This tension between conventional avant-garde art and Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro is likely tied to the history of  Conceptual art in Latin America. The rampant censorship and repression in Latin America during the emergence of Conceptual art meant that the works produced in Latin America during this period were highly politicized by nature. As artist Luis Camnitzer writes, “...mutual leakage between art and politics was unavoidable, especially since Latin American art was always strongly oriented toward content, and content was easily politicized.” With its pointed pedagogical and political aim, Acción del Encierro problematized the conventional, opaque, and open-ended aims of traditional avant-garde art.

Despite the fact that Carnevale’s audience did not break the glass as envisioned, Acción del Encierro proposes a method of “exemplary violence” as a tool to bring about political consciousness and an awareness of personal agency. This method could play a role in mobilizing the public to address our current social problems, including issues like housing crises, unjustly low minimum-wages, inequitable access to healthcare, and so on. Such large tasks are akin to the gargantuan problems conventional avant-garde art and Latin American Conceptual art aimed to address: the commodification of art and the political injustice of authoritarian regimes. Each of these overwhelming issues induces similar feelings of hopelessness and paralysis in the oppressed class. “Exemplary violence” causes the masses to physicalize self-liberation and personal agency, breaking the cycle of stagnation and complacency. This method also has the ability to ideologically unify the oppressed, as they build political consciousness and group identity through their collective action. Kester refers to this process is the “reciprocal relationship...between thought and action, strategy and resistance, and theory and practice.” Carnevale’s method of “exemplary violence” provides us with a method of galvanizing the masses under oppressive conditions.

“Exemplary violence” could play a pivotal role in addressing the global environmental crisis. Avoiding climate disaster requires the overhaul of polluting companies, corrupt politicians, and more broadly, the capitalist system. Although environmental groups, activists, politicians, and many others have been pushing for stronger environmental protections for decades, the capitalist system is, in many ways, at odds with climate protection. Provided the global community has a mere 11 years to cap global carbon emissions and global warming at 1.5 °C to avoid the worst impacts of climate change, it is absolutely necessary for our systems of production and consumption to change. This is an overwhelming task that, like the oppressive power of authoritarian regimes, invokes feelings of helplessness and hopelessness among the public. While the most marginalized communities will be disproportionately by climate change, the bourgeois class (coal and oil CEO’s, politicians, etc.) will continue to profit. It is clear that there are many parallels between the environmental crisis and the political crisis Carnevale aimed to address though Acción del Encierro. Due to these similarities, I believe that it may be time to employ methods like Carnevale’s “exemplary violence” to provoke a sense of collective power, unity, and agency among the working class.

Despite decades of political engagement between environmental advocates and political bodies, global environmental laws have not progressed to the degree necessary to avoid environmental collapse. In the United States, the 1960’s and 70’s marked the ‘golden age’ for environmental federal action with the passage of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts, but few nation-wide environmental laws have been passed since. While political protests, such as the most recent Global Climate Strike on September 20, 2019, aim to influence the voting behavior of our politicians, Debray writes that deliberation between the oppressor and the oppressed merely delays an insurgency. He writes, “In the new context of struggle to the death, there is no place for spurious solutions...there is no middle way.” Using Carnevale’s method of “exemplary violence” may be an important component of mobilizing a larger portion of the global community to bypass political institutions and building a revolutionary consciousness among the global proletariat.

The social impact of a piece that incites “exemplary violence” may be limited by a number of factors, however. One limiting factor includes the context in which the work is presented to the audience. The political context of the period, such as beatings and jailings that occurred at the University of Buenos Aires, might deter audience members from engaging in “exemplary violence,” which may have been the case for Carnevale’s piece. At the same time, a particularly riot and protest-heavy period might provide ripe conditions for audience members to participate in “exemplary violence.” Additionally, the physical context in which the work is situated could impact the audience’s participation. As Kester notes, one reason the audience members may have been reluctant to break Carnevale’s glass wall is out of respect for the gallery space. Had Acción del Encierro taken place in a less curated and respected space, perhaps their behavior would have been different (one could argue that the piece would lose some of its intended meaning in a less bourgeois setting, however). Another limiting factor is the dialogue, or lack thereof, that takes place after the event of “exemplary violence” happens. If Carnevale’s viewers had broken the glass as intended, would they have drawn the connection between their confinement and their oppression under Onganía? Would they have been allowed to discuss their interpretations of the piece together? Would a more dialogical piece of work better reveal this connection between the work and political reality? Lastly, the social impact of the piece may be limited by the social positioning of the audience members. Although avant-garde art makes the assumption that the audience is a homogenous group of bourgeois individuals in need of socio-political education and enlightenment, Kester notes that artists should consider the actual class identities and cultural make-up of their audience members. Social positioning, after all, will affect a viewer’s response to the given material, and have an effect on the piece’s overall social impact. What might have happened if the audience members at Carnevale’s exhibit had been members of Onganía’s federal police force, fellow avant-garde artists, the exhibit’s curators, or a combination of all three? Each individual’s preconceived relationship with gallery spaces, violence, and authority would impact their behavior once locked in the room, and would likely lead to different outcomes.

A deeper question regarding the social impact of Carnevale’s work, and expanding to any work that aims to employ “exemplary violence” is: what is defined as ‘socially impactful’ and who decides? It appears to me that there is dissonance between the aims of Conceptual art and the specific political aims of a piece such as Acción del Encierro. On one hand, Kester notes that Conceptual art is largely propositional. The preparation and intention that goes into the construction of a Conceptual piece is of utmost importance, and what happens once the audience members actually arrive and interact with the work is less important. From this perspective, a critic with a purely Conceptual background might argue that Carnevale’s piece was successful in impacting society simply due to the fact that it existed and people experienced it - whether or not they came to the exact conclusion Carnevale intended could be seen as rather negligible. On the other hand, Carnevale was clear that Acción del Encierro had a specific political aim under the Onganía regime. One might wonder how Carnevale herself viewed the success or social impact of her work, given that the audience members never engaged in her envisioned “exemplary violence.” From a revolutionary theorists perspective, perhaps that of Lenin or Debray, one might deem Carnevale’s work a failure given that it did not successfully radicalize the audience (though it may have exacerbated or drawn attention to their oppression). The degree to which Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro was ‘socially impactful’ is subject to how the term is defined and who gets to define it.

Graciela Carnevale’s avant-garde work, Acción del Encierro, aimed to incite “exemplary violence” among its audience members in order to reveal the agency held by the working class under the oppressive Onganían regime. Inspired by the work of revolutionary theorists Lenin and Debray, Carnevale used this work to assume the role of the foco militant, bringing about political consciousness among the oppressed class and galvanizing them into revolutionary action. Her work maintained the pedagogical aims of traditional avant-garde art, while challenging the style’s insistence on remaining opaque, incomprehensible, and anti-discursive to its viewers. Straying from this convention, Acción del Encierro aimed to show viewers that they had revolutionary power, that they could be agents of political change despite the authoritarian regime. Carnevale’s technique of inciting “exemplary violence” to break the cycle of complacency among the disempowered working class might be transferable to current social movements, specifically the environmental movement. The social impact potential of Acción del Encierro and related works may be limited by a number of factors including the political and physical context, the presence of dialogue, and the social positioning of the audience members. Lastly, the piece begs larger questions regarding who defines get to define the term ‘social impact’ and how the term is defined. It is clear that Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro continues to hold immense influence and power in the artistic and political fields well beyond its introduction in 1968.


Bibliography

Camnitzer, Luis. Conceptualism in Latin American Art. Didactics of Liberation., Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2007.

“Excerpt from the Artist Talk with Graciela Carnevale, 10.03.2012.” YouTube, ZKM , 29 June 2012, www.youtube.com/watch?v=u_pLg5VEuIA.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 C Summary for Policymakers. Switzerland: IPCC, 2018.

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass Part I: Spontaneity and Consciousness in Revolutionary Theory.” E-flux, Journal 30 (2011): 1-10.

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass Part II: Agonism and the Taming of Dissent.”E-flux, Journal 31 (2012): 1-12.
