---
layout: narrative
title: Response 1
author: Bria Dinkins
date: 26 September 2019
---

Touch Sanitation (1979-80) was a year long project in which, artist Mierle Laderman Ukeles visited each of new York’s municipal department’s districts in order to shake the hand of every one of the 8,500 workers who accepted her gesture (Kennedy, 2016). Ukeles, inspired to learn about the innards of byzantine system due to her interest in the symbolism and existential aesthetic in garbage and this specific labor, proposed that she be artist in residence for the municipality and conduct this performance (ibid.); this was her strategic model.  This performance was documented throughout and these documents: photographs, videos, maps, plans, press clippings were exhibited in galleries and more traditional art spaces.

I was first intrigued by the ambiguity in the project when I first saw th  e photo presented in class. I was drawn to the stark differences between Ukeles, the worker she was shaking hands with and the background. Immediately I was skeptical. It all felt very performative. As I learned more about the project in class and even more than that after researching it, I became very interested in the role of the documentation of the work as part of or outside of the performance itself. I also became intrigued by the process of not simply of acting it out and following it through, but the process for deciding to do the performance and the process of becoming an artist in residence. Ultimately, I chose Touch Sanitation as the artwork which can teach how to better address social problems because although I felt it had many strengths, especially in overcoming the traditional limitations of the avant-garde and its transcendence of social class, the non-art and art worlds, it still left many unanswered questions about the need for reflexivity and self-awareness. In my analysis of the work, I was able to complicate my own initial reactions to work when I was forced to consider what it means to see a work in isolation verses in a larger context.

Touch Sanitation was rather conceptual and it challenged the traditional and strict aspects of avant-garde art. It was not traditionally opaque or object based. However it is the documentation, specifically the photographs of the performance which are perhaps most accessible as even if someone does not know the relevance of the photo, of the handshake, the symbolism, the moment a viewer sees this photo already means that these sanitation workers are more visible. The visibility and indexicality of the image of the sanitation worker already has impacted the viewer and can do this without them being consciously aware of its “meaning”. The performance was not ‘banking’ art and the documents were not ‘banking art’ either. But the performance was not dialogical in that it did not involve community conversation which evolved into creation, but the effort and inner dialogue of an individual who then created a performance to reflect this. It was not static because it required Ukeles’ movement. It did and does, however, inspire conversation. The performance was not for the art world or for the critics.

The primary theme of Touch Sanitation was visibility. The goal was to make the sanitation workers visible. In her Age, Race, Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference (1984), Audre Lorde speaks of the importance of an intersectional consideration of difference and and an acknowledgement of difference. She references how the oppressed or marginalized groups have historically been made to explain their realities to the oppressor in hopes they will expand their consciousness. She writes: “Institutionalized rejection of difference is an absolute necessity in a profit economy which needs outsiders as surplus people”. Lorde explains that as “members of such an economy” one of the ways we have been conditioned to respond to these differences is by ignoring it. This refusal results in the “endemic” misidentification and distortion of difference. Lorde contends that we do use energy to ignore differences and the result is “voluntary isolation, or false and treacherous connection”. Ukeles very literally aims and succeeds in making the sanitation workers more visible. She does this by (literally) reaching out to the workers and in her documentation of it, she opens the door to a conversation about difference and ignorance. As she, the artist shakes hands with the worker or smiles with the worker and this is photographed, viewers will be able to “see” the sanitation worker as the artist “sees”, acknowledges, and engages this worker with the handshake and consequently the viewer feel as though the artist and themself is making that acknowledgement together. In this way, Ukeles implicates herself in an unforgiving and ungrateful society which relies on these workers everyday for everything, but refuses to see them.

In another way, Ukeles may fall into a trap similar to the one Lorde considers when she writes:

    Somewhere, on the edge of consciousness, there is what I call a mythical non, which each one of us within our hearts knows “that is not me.” In America, this norm is usually defined as white, thin, male, young, heterosexual, christian, and financially secure. It is with this mythical norm that the trappings of power reside within this society. Those of us who stand outside that power often identify one way in which we are different, and we assume that to be the primary cause of all oppression, forgetting other distortions around difference, some of which we ourselves may be practicing. By and large within the women’s movement today, white women focus upon their oppression as women and ignore differences of race, sexual preference, class, and age.”

Ukeles does not equate her struggle with the workers, but because she was grappling with the difficulties of re-entering an art world and being seen as just a mother and no longer an artist, the magnitude of her privilege may have been concealed. Her legitimacy as a white artist and actor with a convincing idea allowing her to get that position in order to do this very work may not have been afforded to another artist with the same idea. Ukeles’ work was about making the invisible or ignored visible. Her work was about the underappreciation for sanitation workers—workers who are seen as dirty because they pick up the trash that we create. Her work was about social status associated with this occupation and of labor in general. But can you really show labor without showing everything else? Part of what is striking about the photographs and other visual material is that Ukeles, a blonde white woman with sunglasses, is pictured next to black and brown male sanitation workers. In another set of photos she speaks with white male higher-ups. It is this ignorance and absence of gender, race and more which complicates Ukeles’ project. Although Ukeles acknowledges that sanitation is important, necessary work, she only acknowledges one difference— the invisibility that comes with this occupation/social status. Ukeles learning is different than the audience’s learning or realization. She positions herself almost as an ethnographer, immersing herself in a community in order to understand it.

Touch Sanitation brings up ideas of dialogue as opposed to actual change and the spectacular as opposed to the collaborative audience. At first I thought of Ukeles work as more of an act of agitation than construction because she was shaking the platform of art, but she clearly was not seen as threatening as she existed and thrived within the municipal system. Although she seemed to want to affect the perception of the workers and in that way was closer to affecting structural change, she chose not to take direct action, and the project was still rather isolated. She not only had the privilege and social power to gain entry into the system, but had the added privilege and social power of existing and working in the system. The community she organized was of the workers and municipal system on one hand and the audience on the other. Grant Kester believes that it is the social capital an artist is given  and how they use it which determines which an artist becomes (19). What I did not know before, but became aware of was the extent of Ukeles’ project. In addition to meeting and shaking the hands of the workers, she was shadowing workers, conducting interviews with them, and giving them insight into her own work . Perhaps Ukeles established a community space for sanitation workers to be seen and listened to and in doing so she made herself part of this community. In her role as resident artist perhaps things that could not have said out loud previously became acceptable and normal. Kester wrote: “Art, politics, pedagogy and poetry overlap, integrate and cross pollinate into a whole—a form of overcoming the agitation/construction polarity” (2011, 21).

Ukeles worked as a bridger of the gap, a legitimate and empathetic liaison connecting sanitation workers, the larger city authority and removed audiences. Kester believed that socio-political relationships taking the place of traditional art tools was a necessary part of social art (2011, 15). In Touch Sanitation, Ukeles absorbed information like a sponge,but did not seem to use her power to change it. Unlike many artists, Ukeles worked within the municipal structure of which in many ways confined and defined her subjects; she did not work outside of it. Her goal was not to embolden the workers to demand more pay, benefits, or treatments. She did not get sanitation workers, higher ups and the broader to community together for conversation or offer to facilitate this dialogue. Ukeles used the municipal space for its conceptual and constructive qualities. She was subversive in a way and assimilative in the other. She was not entirely disruptive, but her role was inventive.

As I gained more and more context surrounding the piece, I became more aware not only of the contradictions of inside of it, but more so the complexity of judging a piece in isolation and my own inclinations to criticize this one in particular. In 1976, Ukeles performed with the help of more than 300 cleaners, maintenance workers and security guards in Manhattan. She had been developing her interest in sanitation labor for a while. When Touch Sanitation came to fruition not only was it seen as entirely political at the time, but it was ridiculed by fellow artists and feminists who did not approve of its idiosyncrasies. Her work and what it looked like was not seductive. Despite this, Ukeles not only maintained faith in her work and continued it, but also maintained her position as artist in residence and has been there for over 40 years. This immersion that extends entirely beyond the year project and includes before the project began, is indicative of a commitment to the municipal community. After Touch Sanitation, Ukeles continued to engage in more performances and create more exhibits about sanitation work. Apparently, she still has an office and is still greeted by workers “like an old friend” (Steinhaur, 2017). She also still has a keen awareness of the infrastructure of the department as if she worked their as a commissioner of it.

What may be seemingly “wrong” about touch sanitation was fine in actuality, but it could have been different.
Perhaps Touch Sanitation has faults in its appearance, but the personal execution can be lost on an audience member such as myself, an audience member who sees a piece of it, in isolation, in an art historical context  or classroom, 40 years removed.In this way, my goal in analyzing Touch Sanitation and seeing it as a model social art performance was to see the possible problematics in an approach and seeing the ways in which that approach can still pay off, because after all, socially engaged art can be difficult and complicated. As I learned more about the project, I felt silly about my critique of it. A question I posed to myself was: Is it worth critiquing an approach (if it may harbor problematic components) if it seems turns out well?

Overall, Touch Sanitation made me think about anthropology. In what ways does the anthropological/ethnographic concept of reflexivity and informed consent relate to positions of artists and their social/political art projects?Along these same lines...Do social artists have the responsibility to reveal their motivations or processes to their subjects and audiences? Should there be ethical guidelines to social art especially in the specific use of/reliance on humans in or a part of the work or performance? Also, in what ways does immersion, long-term commitment, relationship building and the larger art world context during this time inform and change my perception of the work previously seen in isolation?

I was drawn to Touch Sanitation due to its complicated, layered identity as a performance. It is clear that at the time, it helped to radicalize and redefine the avant-garde. Although I do believe I understand the piece better because of the context I was afforded, I still wonder about the isolated inner and outer circles of dialogue the piece created between artist and sanitation workers and artist and everyone else and if those circles will ever intersect. Ukeles’ commitment to visibility and listening was important, but I wish her piece included her audience in real time, forging a more full community conversation instead of serving as a mediator in hopes of provoking one. Her idea of shaking the hands of the workers and its scale showed strength in physical representation and symbolic awareness. The work  is very successful in showing the importance of an artist’s commitment, immersion and relationship building, activeness in learning and in being involved, as well as listening and platform re-invention. In its possible faults, we also learn how to continue to be mindful and continue to keep pushing further.

References

Grant Kester, Conversations Pieces. Community and Communication in Modern Art University of California Press: Berkeley, 2011) Introduction and Chapter 1.

Kennedy, Randy. “An Artist Who Calls the Sanitation Department Home.” The New York Times,  The NewYork Times, 21 Sept. 2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/arts/design/mierle-laderman-ukeles-new-york-city-sanitation-department.html.

Lorde, Audre. “Age, Race, Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference”, exerpt/edited by Paloma Checa-Gismero. Originally published 1984.

Steinhauer, Jillian, et al. “How Mierle Laderman Ukeles Turned Maintenance Work into Art.” Hyperallergic, 10 Feb. 2017, hyperallergic.com/355255/how-mierle-laderman-ukeles-turned-maintenance-work-into-art/.
