---
layout: narrative
title: "Acción del Encierro: Approaching Radical Liberation through Creative Violent Destruction "
author: Diana Martínez
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

Impactful socially engaged art responds to context-specific issues by introducing a new ideological paradigm through a pedagogical approach. In avant-garde fashion, socially engaged art pushes viewers to reimagine their understanding of being and of relating to their community. If the artwork elevates the spectator’s critical consciousness, the spectator will be more likely to replicate the art piece’s practices and principles to address pressing injustices. Thus, when evaluating an art piece’s success in creating a significant social impact, one must view artistic intentions, pedagogy, public discourse, and historical context as co-dependent units that are intrinsically linked.

Under this framework, Graciela Carnevale’s 1968 Acción del Encierro performance art piece becomes an important reference point to understand successful socially engaged art and its limits. Carnevale’s piece emulated a symbolic destruction aimed to provoke viewers to resist authoritative governance. By encouraging the use of “exemplary violence,” Carnevale intended to demonstrate how the masses could repurpose the practices of the oppressor to fight for collective liberation.

As Argentina’s military general Juan Carlos Onganía suppressed the voices of those who questioned his dictatorship, Argentine artists Graciela Carnevale worked on her newest political art piece Acción del Encierro. In 1968, the debut year of Carnevale’s piece, Argentina was experiencing an asphyxiating period of political repression. Onganía dictatorship was particularly interested in silencing university students. These young intellectuals represented a demographic with a critical consciousness unwilling to easily submit to his governance. Consequentially, the dictatorship sought violent means to muffle their dissent. La noche de los bastones largos (Night of the Long Batons)–a brutal event in 1966 that started as a peaceful demonstration led by University of Buenos Aires faculty and students but turned into a bloody altercation after the police riot control unit arrived–intended to instill fear into current intellectuals speaking out against the dictatorship and hinder future acts of resistance.

However, amid the violence inflicted by Onganía’s military-backed dictatorship, Carnevale sought to use aesthetic practices to challenge his authority and call for social action. Carnvevale referred to Acción del Encierro as a performance art model of “exemplary violence.” This concept was a direct response to the physical and psychological violence that the dictatorship was enacting in Argentina. Acción del Encierro centered the same tool, violence, but reimagined its use to advocate for liberation. Carnevale hoped that her use of exemplary violence would push viewers to recognize they could engage with violence differently than the way the dictatorship was.

To understand the power of socially engaged art to redefine a new way of being, it is important to grasp the meaning and purpose of exemplary violence in Acción del Encierro. In “The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part I,” Art History scholar Grant Kester describes exemplary violence as an act of “creative destruction” intended to inspire art viewers to “emulate or reproduce” the act in the future. According to Kester’s definition, it is evident that Carnevale’s decision to model exemplary violence in Acción del Encierro intended to establish a pedagogical relationship between herself and the art viewer. As such, Carnevale expected viewers to replicate the gestures and lessons they learned in Acción del Encierro outside of the gallery space for purposes of social change.

In Acción del Encierro, exemplary violence took the shape of an isolated, confined gallery space made up of glass windows covered by large posters. Art gallery goers who attended the installation thought they were going to see an art show but were shocked when they saw the doors lock behind them. Carnevale strategically organized the gallery space to simulate a distressful experience of despair. In creating a chaotic situation, Carnevale imagined that participants would reject passivity and instead be triggered to fight back. Carnevale trusted that those trapped inside would have no choice but to look inwards towards their inner agency and use it to break down the gallery’s glass windows.

The element of violence is evident in her art piece through the shock and unsolicited confinement that the gallery goers experience. However, this method of violence contradicted the dictatorship’s use of it. While Onganía used it to silence dissent, Carnevale used it to model resistance and liberation. Carnevale’s Acción del Encierro presented viewers with a shocking reality check that unapologetically rejected passivity. Though her art piece might present to some as violent and insensitive out of historical context, Carnevale’s radical approach reciprocated the same level of intensity that the dictatorship’s political suppression emitted. To respond to the government’s use of violence to silence, Carnevale redefined violence for purposes of liberation.

When one considers the historical context of her art piece, her radical approach becomes reasonable. Kester writes:
“During periods of political repression, the relationship between aesthetics and politics, and between private and public expression, undergoes both erosion and reconsolidation.”

Through Carnevale’s creative performance piece, she presents an eroded relationship between the arts and politics. Through the new relationship that she posits, Carnevale challenges viewers and the larger public to rethink the role of violence in achieving freedom. She urges the viewer to ponder on the following: Does violence only take the form of physical and psychological brutality? Can violence be a catharsis for radical social change? Can individuals singularly extract the energy and force of violence to fight for collective freedom? How can the arts configure a new model of being that transcends the frontiers imposed by the oppressor?

Avant-garde artists have pondered with questions similar to the last one. The avant-garde aims to disrupt tradition (one typically understood as a sociopolitical capitalist structure); explore new Marxist-leaning models of relating and existing; and utilize variations of shock to activate an elevated level of consciousness in the viewer. In this sense, Carnevale’s piece serves as a continuation of the avant-garde tradition because it introduces a complex performance installation that challenges the very essence of violence and urges participants to question the sanity of their reality and urges for self-emancipation. This resonates with Kester’s perception of the avant-garde in Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art, where he suggests that the avant-garde pushes the stagnancy of limits by exploring outside of them. Conceptual artist Luis Camnitzer’s idea of the “didactics of liberation” further speaks to the avant-garde approach that Carnevale employs. According to Camnitzer, this didactic is specific to Latin America and creates an organic synergy between art, politics, and pedagogy. As a result, it is evident that Acción del Encierro is an example of the didactics of liberation. Accounting for this layer geographically situates Acción del Encierro in Latin America and puts it in conversation with larger avant-garde trends of the region. In sum, Acción del Encierro was a radical avant-garde installation that responded to the era’s sociopolitical phenomena and reflected regional artistic patterns.

Furthermore, Acción del Encierro must be viewed under the lens of socially engaged art to evaluate its impact. Social engaged art is the intersection of the avant-grade and dialogical art. Though the latter two constitute as their own genres, their practices and principles often overlap. According to Kester, dialogical art “unfold[s] through a process of performative interaction” where conversations are “reframed as an active, generative process that can help us speak and imagine beyond the limits of fixed identities, official discourse, and the perceived inevitability of conflict.”  Dialogical art, similar to the avant-garde, pushes viewers to hypothesize new ways of navigating the world. However, unlike the avant-garde, it centers dialogue, collaboration, and consent among artists and participants.

Acción del Encierro embodies the avant-garde and certain elements of dialogical art because it boldly calls for collective emancipation, thus elevating a critical consciousness that transcends the limitations of reality. However, it lacks any sort of collaboration between the artist and the viewer, which culminates in a “failed” installation. The participants trapped in the gallery space ultimately receive the help of a passerby walking down the street who notices them trying to desperately escape. The police was called shortly after and released everyone upon arrival. Thus, Carnevale’s hopes of creating a chaotic environment that would result in an emancipatory awakening were crushed. Acción del Encierro served as more of a failed behavioral experiment as opposed to an installation of radical collective liberation and symbolic violence.

Acción del Encierro might have been more successful if dialogue and collaboration had a role in the crafting of this performative art piece. Traditionally, interactive performance art pieces “replace the conventional banking style of art––in which the artist deposits an expressive content into a physical object, to be withdrawn later by the viewer––with a process of dialogue and collaboration.” Acción del Encierro follows the former part of this statement because it depends on the viewer to engage with the artwork to mold its meaning.

However, it deviates from this tradition by omitting a conversation (and by default a degree of consent) between the artist and the viewer. It is critical to have consent between the creative and the community in art pieces that aim to disrupt with acute shock. Without consent, the artwork fails to be trauma-informed and can cause more harm to the individuals than good. Thus, although Acción del Encierro succeeded in providing an ideological and dialectic code that advocated for the Argentina’s liberation from a repressive dictatorship, it lacked a conversation between the artist and the masses.

From the success and limitations of Acción del Encierro, one can learn more about the importance of merging avant-garde traditions with dialogical aesthetic practices in order to maximize an art piece’s social impact. Carnevale tackled the avant-garde through a radical, pedagogical approach that utilized the instrument of the oppressor. In doing so, she redefined the role of violence and encouraged viewers to replicate the installation’s gestures. Nonetheless, it is also important to note that effects of an absent dialogue between artist and participants. The participant’s inability to escape the confining gallery reflects the lack of consent and collaboration between the creative actor and the community. As a result, the avant-garde installation unfolded as more of a behavioral experiment than as a radical model for liberation. Through the success and limitations of Acción del Encierro, we can learn how to create socially engaged art with sustainable effects.

Bibliography

Kester, Grant. Conversations Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art. University of California Press: Berkeley, 2011.

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part I: Spontaneity and Consciousness in Revolutionary Theory.” E-Flux Journal 30 (December 2011).

Secretaría de Asuntos Académicos. “50 Años: ¿Qué Fue La Noche de Los BastonesLargos?” La noche de los bastones largos: 50 años. Universidad de Buenos Aires, n.d. http://www.uba.ar/50nbl/contenidos.php?id=1.
