---
layout: narrative
title: Reimagining “Time-Space”
author: Eva Baron
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

Harnessing tools of disruption and ambiguity, avant-garde art has historically resisted the conventional, seeking instead to radically reinvent the political and cultural potential of art. Situated at the center of this practice is an overwhelming desire to deconstruct pre-established notions of space and time. To disrupt these qualities, which are often deemed static or linear, is to disturb the viewer, to impose a cognitive dissonance that inspires a shocking awareness. Rachel Whiteread’s 1993 House synthesizes these motivations, relying on traditional avant-garde strategies such as spatial and temporal ambiguity. Complicating “normal time-spaces and the ideas of time-spaces,” as Doreen Masey comments, House ruptures expectations by isolating itself from its surrounding neighborhood (Conversation Pieces 18). While Whiteread’s House may facially reinforce avant-garde art practices and theories, her piece nevertheless fails to radically reimagine time-spaces in such a way that they provoke dialogue, corrode barriers that hinder accessibility. Graciela Carnevale’s 1968 Acción del Encierro (Confinement Action), however, departs from the growing elitism in the avant-garde canon. Rather than relying on time-spaces to simply induce shock, Confinement Action manipulates the spatial and temporal in order to create a pedagogical environment, one which depends on its audience as well as its surroundings. Problematizing the historically elitist usages of time-spaces in avant-garde art, Carnevale deepens the impact of manipulated time and space with Confinement Action, uniting the didactic, her audience, and the Latin American context.

Winning the Turner Prize, House proves to be one of Whiteread’s most prominent pieces, soliciting a cacophony of reactions due to its opacity. A sleek, concrete mold of an Edwardian terrace house interior, House occupied a nearly empty lot in the Bow neighborhood—one of London’s poorest boroughs—before its destruction later in 1993 (Conversation Pieces 18). The piece, replacing a house scheduled for demolition, quickly became a monument to domesticity, to its apparent impermanence in the face of gentrification and inevitable urban expansion. Heralded as both “hermetic and implacable,” House inspired a raw nostalgia for the domestic while simultaneously resisting monolithic interpretations (Conversation Pieces 20). Rather than assuming a coherent narrative, one which remained transparent to any spectator, House, as James Lingwood describes, absorbed into “its body all those individual thoughts, feelings, and memories projected onto it” (Conversation Pieces 20). Mirroring and provoking disparate responses, House maintained an impenetrable opacity, one which, to many critics, amplified House’s position as a “good avant-garde work of art” (Conversation Pieces 20). The juxtaposition of House’s precise yet hauntingly sterile finish to its surroundings similarly reinforces the piece’s disruptive qualities. Resisting assimilation into the Bow neighborhood, House was encased by an astounding and jarring emptiness—trees, grass, and other structures were largely separate, if not completely removed, from the house’s direct vicinity. The stark and somehow unapologetic insertion of House into the Bow community further troubles the spectator’s ability to compartmentalize the piece, thus intensifying the spatial disorientation and dissonance the piece already elicits with its obscurity. A testament to avant-garde’s “provocative yet indeterminate” nature, House interrupts normative understandings not only of art and its analysis, but also of the space it occupies in relationship to its surroundings (Conversation Pieces 20).

Regardless of the praise House receives by scholars and critics alike, Whiteread’s piece nevertheless perpetuates the establishment of elitist time-spaces, born from the impulse to shock rather than engage with specific communities or contexts. House, despite its seeming popularity, prevails as an image of inaccessibility, favoring the gaze of the “critic eager to combine the frisson of an initial semantic resistance with the…pleasure of eventual hermeneutic mastery” (Conversation Pieces 21). Far removed from this privileged minority is the non-art public, consisting of few people who are able to parse House’s elusive meaning. While the inability to comprehend Whiteread’s piece can easily be attributed to its pretentiousness, essayists interpret the frustration of the non-art public as mere “philistine reaction[s]” (Conversation Pieces 20). Rather than being seen as justified, the hostile responses of the public become utterly incompatible with the time-space of House, effectively constructing a dichotomy between the elitist and non-elitist time-spaces. Both spheres ultimately exist in a vacuum, with the “lunacy, small-mindedness, and opportunism” of the non-art public fundamentally—and, in some ways, inherently—incapable of permeating the elitist time-space (Conversation Pieces 21). The trench separating the two, however, is not simply a result of House catering to privileged and educated audiences, interacting in their own isolated time-space; it also spurs from Whiteread’s unwillingness to consider the Bow community in her artistic methodology. Context and environment, of course, do not—nor should not—always have to be an integral element of an artist’s methodology. Although when significant barriers in comprehension or accessibility are perpetuated due to a lack of engagement with a community, the piece certainly becomes suspect. Whiteread’s intention of provoking an elite audience who possesses intellectual and analytical caliber detaches any obligation not only to the residents of Bow, but also to an apparently “philistine mass” (Conversation Pieces 21). Despite the fact that House assumes a solid position within the avant-garde canon, Whiteread nevertheless divorces the non-art public from elite time-spaces, realms that only privileged members of society can fully exist in.

In comparison, though, Carnevale’s Confinement Action heavily relies on its specific context, ingraining it within a public atmosphere distinct from that of House. A participatory piece of performance art, Confinement Action sought to entice an “exemplary” form of violence in its participants by locking them in a glass box covered with posters, isolating them from the outside. Once reaching a proper state of desperation, Carnevale theorized that the participants would be incentivized to break the glass restraining them in order to escape. The act of breaking the glass would effectively empower the participants, instilling within them the tools necessary to combat political repression in Argentina at the time. While none of the participants were moved to shatter the glass—perhaps because they perceived the gallery setting as too formal—Carnevale nevertheless hoped that the gesture would “inspire [the participants] to emulate or reproduce it at some future point” (“Breaking Glass I” 3). The creative destruction essential to Confinement Action, however, necessitated a context-based and public approach to the crisis in Argentina. When extrapolated from the Argentinian and larger Latin American political climate, Confinement Action loses an amount of its pedagogical potential. Intentionally functioning as a vehicle of self-emancipation for the Argentinian public, Carnevale’s installation specifically targeted participants in their unique context, hoping to elevate them to a heightened awareness of their own passivity in the face of political repression. The location and environment of Carnevale’s piece ultimately influenced her artistic methodology greatly, and without the conversational and community-based elements of Confinement Action, much of its meaning would be altered. To compare Confinement Action and House, then, is to clarify how each project interacts with the space around it. While House could easily be removed from Bow and still retain its fundamental meaning, Confinement Action would be stripped of some of its most essential qualities, such as its didactic engagement with the Argentinian community.

In this sense, the time-space Confinement Action established was not spatially isolated or exclusive, instead allowing a broader public to interact with the pedagogical experience of the installation. Straying from facial or perhaps shallow attempts to shock viewers due to sheer monumentality or unconventionality, Carnevale manipulates the spatial and temporal so as to construct an environment that is intensely didactic, rooted in her empathy towards a non-art public. Rather than soliciting frustration for the sake of frustration, as House seemingly does, Carnevale’s installation strives to collapse the traditional relationship and boundaries between artist and viewer. Her installation depends on the public’s engagement, craves it, operates as a result of it. At the core of Confinement Action is—unlike House—the ultimate motivation to cooperate with the “philistine masses,” to frame a time-space in which their frustration suddenly becomes justified, becomes heard, becomes symptomatic not of ignorance but of the Argentinian context in the 1960s. Beyond instituting accessibility and a reliance on a broader audience, Carnevale’s controlled usage of the temporal and spatial proves similarly radical. In vogue with contemporary political movements in Latin America at the time, such as the Tupamaros, Confinement Action offered a “coercive model of participatory art,” in which “the spectators have no choice; they are obliged, violently, to participate” (“Breaking Glass II” 4). Carnevale’s pedagogical model is thus one that reimagines the limits of avant-garde art and its ability to shock awake. Carnevale’s ownership of time and space is not used to disrupt in a very metaphorical, abstract way—one which relies on the interpretation of an elite class in order to be understood—but instead proves immediate and sympathetic. The physical confinement induced by the installation is spatially and temporally regulated in a way that is palpable to the participants, making no attempt to obscure the connection between the glass box and a larger Argentinian political context. The time-space, although controlled by Carnevale, ultimately institutes a mutual obligation between viewer and artist: the artist must create an environment that, in its temporal and spatial composition, encourages reflection in a wide range of people, regardless of class; the viewers, in turn, must actively engage with the artist as a community. Despite the fact that Confinement Space’s success can certainly be questioned—with concerns of Carnevale ignoring the “differentiated subjectivities of those people she [chose] to confine”—her installation nevertheless brought accessibility to the core of its time-space in a way that House did not (“Breaking Glass II” 4). By being regulated in such a concrete, direct way, Carnevale’s time-space made no effort to remain exclusive, instead hoping to entice viewers into action.

When comparing how House and Confinement Action both attempt to “shock awake,” it becomes clear that Carnevale’s manipulation of time-space is far more relevant and conducive to social change, due to the fact that it actively seeks to engage a specific community. Reserved for an elite population, Whiteread’s House resists interpretations that spur from the frustrated masses. While her piece may, as Lingwood insists, be a reflection of various reactions, ranging from the purely emotional to the analytical, House is nevertheless largely incomprehensible to the non-art public. This dissonance, of course, proves intentional. Whiteread’s disruption of Bow’s cohesive time-space by inserting House into it was a decision that only a select few seemingly understood. Those who failed to grasp House’s complexity were members of a public that felt as though their “social time-space had been rudely disrupted,” and were subsequently “abandoned as lost causes” (Conversation Pieces 20). There is an irony implicit in this analysis, however, being that the non-art public—especially those who lived in the Bow neighborhood—were actually subject to a disturbing rupture in their social context. House, to some, served as an ugly reminder that the artist is privileged over the community that the artistic creation resides in. Whiteread, in this sense, seemingly lacked consideration for how members of the Bow neighborhood would react to such a stark and, to some, unattractive structure in their community. The frustration in response to this disrupted time-space is thus unsurprising, revealing the underlying tension between artist and viewer that House capitalized upon. Confinement Action, in contrast, constructs a time-space that fundamentally integrates the engagement of a broad public. While Carnevale’s installation may, in some ways, reinforce the hierarchical relationship between artist and viewer, Confinement Action’s efforts to provoke the public proves far more genuine, rooted in a desire to pedagogically guide Argentinians towards action. There was ultimately no effort to bar comprehension or perpetuate the elitism that historically defined avant-garde art; rather, Carnevale became, as Régis Debray would argue, a foquista militant, “declaring war on the consciousness of the incarcerated viewer” (“Breaking Glass II” 3). The transformation of Carnevale into a foquista leader epitomizes her motivation to “inspire and radicalize the working class” with a dialogical approach instead of alienating her audience from her methodology (“Breaking Glass II” 3). This interaction at the core of Confinement Action, despite the installation’s faults, demonstrates its ability to arouse social change. As House protects itself from banal interpretations, Confinement Action reverses this relationship, protecting Argentinians and offering a time-space that is conducive to understanding, to action, to communication within a specific context.

Interrupting conventional perceptions of the temporal and the spatial, avant-garde art has historically questioned normativity, pushing art toward complexity and ambiguity. While Whiteread’s House may be an outward success, the piece nevertheless resists accessibility. The time-space House creates is isolated and exclusive, operating on extremely abstract premises that only the elite proves capable of understanding. Rather than producing any sort of insight or action from the broader public, the shock and discomfort House inspires lacks a pedagogical or practical edge—Whiteread simply shocks for the sake of shocking. Further reinforcing the elitism inherent in House’s time-space, the astonishment of the upper class is privileged over that of the non-art public, whose frustration is instead interpreted as a sign of “small-mindedness” or even “lunacy.” Lacking a consideration both for the members of the non-art public and the Bow community, Whiteread constructed a time-space excluding those who failed to grasp House’s complexity. Confinement Action, however, manipulates time-space in order to oblige the “philistine masses” to interact with the installation and the artist; there is, in contrast to House, a deeply rooted desire to engage with the Argentinian public in ways that reject exclusion. Although the motivation to shock awake is certainly essential to Confinement Action as well, the traditional avant-garde impulse resembles something far more radical and accessible. There is, unlike House, a didactic and conversational quality to Carnevale’s installation, one which is influenced specifically by the Argentinian political context. Even though the time-space of Confinement Action is regulated by the artist in a way that temporarily reduces the audience’s agency, the piece nevertheless obligates community-based conversations and actions, urging the participants to reflect upon their own political repression. In this way, Carnevale expands previously elitist time-spaces while simultaneously injecting them with a pedagogical approach to action and disruption. This reimagining ultimately suggests that time-spaces can serve as hubs for public engagement, thus transforming not only the role of the artist and the viewer, but also the way in which the avant-garde strategy of shocking awake can entice social change.

Works Cited

Kester, Grant. Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art. University of California Press, 2014.

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part I: Spontaneity and Consciousness in Revolutionary Theory.” E-flux Journal, no. 30, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–12.

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part II: Agonism and the Taming of Disset.” E-Flux Journal, no. 31, Jan. 2012, pp. 1–15.
