---
layout: narrative
title: A Response to Tucumán arde
author: Gursimran Singh Pannu
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

This essay analyses the art project Tucumán arde: it’s impact as an art piece and potential questions raised in the undertaking of historicising this project into the definition of Latin American conceptualism. It makes points about its political impact, implicit postcolonial critique of politics and art, methods of representation, and communal consolidation.

The rupture of art in 1968 Argentina marks a significant rupture, according to Camnitzer, in contemplating the purpose and meaning in art creation. The harassment from the side of the police to censor a part of the exhibition, a public toilet installation in the pre-eminent avant-garde gallery of Instituto Di Tella, trigged a fervent, revolting response from the artists involved. The infiltration of a dictatorial suppression—a widespread national experience during the time—in the sacred physical space of the gallery made the artists question the impact of their work. Their work, often smothered with political ideology, as such was the reality of the lived experience during the time (for instance, the sealing of the public toilet exhibit by the police evolved into a piece in itself), however, only borrowed from it to graze the prestigious, international, clean white gallery spaces.

Among many definitions of this international prestige of the institution of avant-garde, it is essential, here, to define its aid in the construction of Latin American conceptualism and the tensions that it poses. In contrast to the Concept Art that incubated in the traditional camps of the art hegemon, Camnitzer defines Latin American Conceptualism as a child of art’s convergence with politics, poetry, and pedagogy: a confluence that is typical, in his opinion, of the Latin American experience. Problematising the idea of a (dis)qualification of art in Latin America with respect to the Western tradition, Camnitzer claims their fundamental disconnection and goes as far as to define a global conceptualism of which Latin American Conceptualism and Concept Art are two distinct threads. Both remain determined to depoliticise, but the Western conceptual approach does not necessarily have to subvert. In response to the brutal authoritarian rule and its backbreaking repression of free cultural expression, conceptualism in Latin America felt an urgent need to dissolve the boundary between the gallery and the politicised public, to not just synthesise, from society, in a gallery but to affect the commune with a reception of liberal ideas. When the artists began destroying their bare works on the streets and issuing statements condemning the politically repressed state of Argentina, an itch to integrate politics with art was in order.

Charting the transformation of the artist into a political intellectual, Tucumán arde, a project launched by artists from Buenos Aires and Rosario, used “art to make politics.” The rampant starvation and poverty in the province of Tucumán, because of governmental policies during the time, was unfairly concealed by the government through its positive propaganda for its industrialised plan for the region. To tackle the misinformation about the governmental hypocrisy, Tucumán, the Garden of the Republic, underwent a counter-information campaign of mass-media tactics, Tucumán arde.

As artists around Instituto Di Tella were obliged to contemplate over the narcissistic individuality of their avant-garde works, the politicised need to affect the impoverished Tucumán community led to the questioning of the merits of avant-garde art and the institutions that allowed its producibility for the Latin American case. The regional specificity of this effort, while claiming a pan-Latin American effort echoes a much required postcoloniality. By pushing back on the Western conceptual art canon, Camnitzer claims to expand its narrow lens to include ingenious works of Latin American conceptualism that fail to directly fit into the traditional avant-garde structure that the epistemological centres of New York and Paris set. His positionality in the immersion of one of these centres explains his fervent opposition. In criticising the traditional model, he is implying the west’s implicit privilege in willingly failing to embrace a political model. With ornate discussions about the value of individuality in not just the Western art but also its sociopolitical systems, as opposed to the need for a receptive political community in Latin America, Camnitzer implies the privilege that allows the Western citizen-artist to disassociate themselves from their immediate political context. While they may draw from politics, they would be mere observers. Latin American conceptualists, as evinced by the rampant dictatorial censorship at Instituto Di Tella, realised the impotency of art to cause much needed political resistance in their societies. The “political” Latin American conceptualism wanted to intervene in its social space, not just merely observe, and subvert the structure of the “depoliticised” Western canon through a variety of anti-discourse tactics that questioned its fetishisation and modes of production.

Taking a similarly postcolonial lens—more so than his models of Salpicon and Compota—Camnitzer argues for an explicit postcoloniality in Tucumán arde. Tucumán was “burning” because it was turned into a petri dish of the neoliberal governmental policies, buried under the false image of the success of such policies. Caught in the global politics of the Cold War, the third world suffers through the hands of neocolonial support of the West for its anti-communist dictatorships. In the project of historicising of global conceptual art, the Western canon refuses to consider Latin American conceptualism as a legitimate process because of its kitsch interaction with the political, perhaps because the notion of a high-minded, privileged artist that Bishop stands by. This ability to disconnect from the political community is precisely that privilege that a Western prosperity and hegemony brings. For Tucumán arde to attack directly the Western neoliberal policies and their positive cultural images in the media is to directly attack a global neocolonial political order that continues the oppression of the third world. The project also moves further to protest the neocoloniality implicit in the Western canon. The exhibition that culminated into a biennial undertook the banner of “avant-garde” to challenge its demands that keep out Latin American artists. The basis of “reality” as the material for art in the exhibition challenged the formalistic assumptions of the western tradition. Instead of the limited dematerialisation of the aesthetic in conceptual art, this approach called for a dematerialisation of the existing political structures, with a strong event of leftist, liberal revolt.

While the challenge to the traditional western hegemonic structures in both politics and art is a commendable feat for Tucumán arde. However, its instrumentalisation by Camnitzer to define a unique formula for Latin American conceptualism bears some problems. Camnitzer sees a neocoloniality in not just the art (through the privileged position of the western artist) but also its historicisation, and his writing aims to challenge this trend of scholarship. However, in defining a Latin American conceptualism, he idealises its subversive nature; he connects it to the political atmosphere during the time, the emergence of military leftist discourse. Is this idealising of resistance, stereotypical of contemporary Latin America, its fetishisation? Where is the multiplicity of political views in the politicisation of art? Moreover, Camnitzer shatters the boundaries of conceptual art by politicising its content, but what are its new boundaries before such an approach disintegrates into chaos?

The project’s ingenious strategies of production come in hand to argue for Tucumán arde’s impact on its political community. The first stage, compilation of testimonial material sets the community in a motion of consciousness. The audio/visual proof is necessary to support the accusations of the artists, but the sheer act of interaction with the students, union leaders and residents of Tucumán about the fall of the province brings around a unified political consciousness based on the experience of a shared struggle. The police felt the impact of this collaborative power and warned the public in the area to not interact with the artists, to maintain the power imbalances and political incoherence so necessary for the legitimacy granted to police’s coercive violence. By just facilitating the formation an established avenue, in the sacredness of the artist’s camera, Tucumán aimed to foster a narrative of political resilience not just for the confines of its gallery, but for the provincial community as well.

While the fostering of a politically conscious community among the oppressed is, without question, doing social good, is that the job of art? When we applaud Tucumán arde for its positive social engagement, is this engagement the new metric of affect for a Latin American conceptualist piece? (Bishop asks similar questions while Kester breaks her theoretical model down to support Carnevale’s piece). How, if we value all modes of cultural production like Camnitzer, are we supposed to differentiate art and its impact from other modes of cultural production? What will become of the institutionalisation and professionalisation of art and artists, when everything can be deemed art?

Another approach to production was the project’s use of mass media to hack the dominant avenue for national storytelling from the bourgeois government’s false propaganda. While the challenge to the western avant-garde establishment was an act of agitation, the effort of delivering counter-information for multiplicity of narratives in the dominant media sphere was an act of construction. This creative potential allowed the artists to manipulate the public consciousness towards the suffering of Tucumán. The project’s slogans and graffiti of “Tucumán arde” that were distributed rather mysteriously throughout the city added to its imageability, for its accessibility to a wider audience than that of a sterilised gallery, to build a receptive political community out of the public. While a theorist like Fry would have expressed disdain regarding the media imageability of Tucumán as kitsch commercialism, the integration of various strategies of art-making—in a very specific regional context—to produce a coherence piece avoids the reproducibility of Tucumán arde by the hands of the dominant culture. Whether or not its imageability lands it in the palette of avant-garde remains unclear to me.

Tucumán arde was a successful case of art that produced tangible sociopolitical effect on multiple fronts: in its leftist partisan position and ideology, its commitment to transforming a receptive community, and also in subverting the art institution from the inside. However, its historicisation to define a genre of Latin American conceptualism, while it stands as a complex model, poses issues of stereotyping into legibility and, on the other hand, of expanding into chaos.



Works Cited


Camnitzer, Luis. Conceptualism in Latin America (Austin: Texas University Press, 2007).

Kester, Grant. Conversation Pieces (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011).

Kester, Grant. “The Sound of Breaking Glass.” E-Flux Journal #3.
