---
layout: narrative
title: Bloc 1 Response
author: Isabella Fiorante
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

In 1994, Austrian arts collective Wochenklauser brought together several different groups of journalists, politicians, sex workers and social activists in Zurch on three hour long boat cruises on Lake Zurch. The group was tasked with having a conversation about the difficult situation that many drug-addicted prostitutes were facing on the streets of Zurich at the time. Many prostitutes were homeless or lived in conditions close to homelessness and they were often harassed by the police and their clients. Furthermore, they were heavily stigmatized by Swiss society, making conversations about change difficult and imposing another barrier in the way of political action. This boat trip was one of many organized by Wochenklauser over a few weeks as part of an intervention and convention on drug policy. At the conclusion of these boat cruises, the participants were able to reach a consensus on a modest solution to the problem at hand. They agreed upon the creation of a boarding house in which sex workers could have a safe place to sleep and access to needed services.

Wochenklauser’s work serves as a good model from which we could learn to better address social problems as the work does not just draw attention to a problem in society but actually seeks to mitigate the effects of this problem. The execution of this work was highly strategic and the model behind the implementation was well thought out by the members of Wochenklauser. The two key aspects of the work are that firstly, it seeks to unite people that are affected by the problem with those who have power and stand to generate change. Secondly, the work sought to create the ideal situation in which a consensus could be reached. It operated on neutralized ground (or in this case, water) but nevertheless, a space to which all parties had more or less equal claim. Moreover, by not setting these meetings on the streets of Zurich or in a legislator’s office and by removing the participants from media scrutiny, the participants did not necessarily have to act out their societal roles, which increases the chances of actually shifting a participant’s perspective and facilitating real empathy between participants. Lastly, the boats served as an isolated space in which the participants were essentially trapped and no party could get frustrated and leave, which would most likely impede the group’s ability to reach a consensus. This work does not merely acknowledge or draw attention to a social issue but rather, it directly targets the participants’ perspectives and attempts to create actual change through a well thought out and strategic dialogical model.

What differentiates this work from others that we’ve analyzed so far is that this work does not rely upon whether or not the audience “gets” it in order to enact change. One might argue that works like Rachel Whiteread’s House or Graciela Carnavale’s Confinement Action are more consistent with an avant garde art practice than the work of Wochenklauser. House was a concrete and plaster cast of an entire house, displayed in an empty public lot in East London in 1993. Confinement Action was a performance piece in Rosario, Argentina in 1968, in which the audience was locked in a glass walled gallery with the hope that the audience would then break the glass to free themselves. In reality, the audience remained within the gallery until a passerby noticed their entrapment and broke the glass to free them. The piece ended when a fight broke out between a conspirator, locked in the gallery but “in on” the artist’s true intentions, and the passerby, which caused the police to arrive to resolve the conflict, thereby ending the performance piece.

According to Grant Kester, avant garde art seeks to challenge, not reinforce, conventional and established structures of meaning and communication. A large part of avant garde art is based on the idea of creating “art for art’s sake”. Roger Fry, Clive Bell and Clement Greenberg also insisted upon a certain opacity to avant garde art as well as a certain exclusivity in who could understand or had access to understanding the piece, as interpreted and explained by Kester in the introduction to Conversation Pieces. Both Whiteread’s House and Carnevale’s Confinement Action are consistent with this avant garde model as outlined by Kester. House challenges how we view and interact with space and the artist’s reasoning and meanings are not immediately, if ever, clear to the audience. House is opaque as Fry, Bell and Greenberg argued avant garde art should be. Similarly, Confinement Action also sought to challenge how the participants viewed themselves within their political regime. It subverted communication norms and maintained uncertainty between the artist and the participant. Wochenklauser’s boat cruises do not fit comfortably within this definition of avant garde art. The cruises are not “for art’s sake” but rather for the sake of solving a social problem. The piece more or less operates within the typical bounds of communication and its intentions are incredibly clear: the artists wanted to facilitate a conversation with the ultimate goal being social change. However, while the avant garde framework as defined by Kester, Fry, Bell and Greenberg may be useful for interpreting works as art, it does little to evaluate the social change this art generates.

Whiteread’s House was supposedly not understood by the public, as many art publications reported. The audience that “got” it seemed to be the critics that were writing about the project and who placed an emphasis on how the “nonart public” decidedly did not “get” House. With Confinement Action, Carnevale hoped that the violence of the audience breaking the glass of the gallery wall would serve as an example of the violence needed against the state because of the level of oppression the people of Argentina were facing at the time. It is unknown whether the audience understood what the artist was trying to prove. Given how the actual outcome was not what the artist intended, one could argue that they didn’t understand the artist’s political commentary or understand that Carnevale hoped for “exemplary violence”, as they had to be ‘rescued’ by a passerby. However, one could argue, as Kester points out in The Sound of Broken Glass, Part II, that it is possible the audience was all too aware of their place within the political regime and did not wish to partake in extra violence with unknown consequences.

This generates the overarching question: if the audience does not understand your intentions, how effective can your work be? Some might argue still very effective. Sol Lewitt declared the actual execution of conceptual art “a perfunctory affair” and that the real meaning of the work is engrained in the artist’s planning and thought process beforehand. Moreover, in the case that the intended effects of the piece are not felt by the audience, this may elevate the piece even further by the standards of avant garde art outlined earlier. If the audience remains unaffected, the piece becomes primarily about the aesthetic, it becomes “art for art’s sake”. It is understood and appreciated only by the art community and those “in the know” about the artist’s intentions, and it fulfills the opacity and exclusivity of the Bell, Fry and Greenberg definition of avant garde.

While these points might be valid when considering art through an artistic or avant garde lens, they fall short when considering the social impact of the piece. To bring the analysis back to the original work at hand, Wochenklauser’s boat cruises serve as a strong example of how to better address present social problems because the work resulted in a lasting and measurable, if modest, solution to the issue at hand. Furthermore, it facilitated connections between the artist, the participants and the problem so in a situation in which a consensus could not be reached, one could still arguably assume that social change had been enacted in the sense that participants at the very minimum had communicated with someone that would not normally operate in their social circle and participants had, to even a small degree, been introduced to a new perspective.

Lastly, it is important to evaluate the emotional and physical toll these works took on their participants in order to understand their capacity for enacting social change because addressing social problems by inflicting a large degree of violence on an audience in the name of change is dangerous. Whiteread’s House, exacted minimal physical or emotional damage, if any, on its audience as it didn’t directly involve the audience as participants. However, Confinement Action indirectly asked its audience to participate in violence and when they refused, or at least did not consider violence as an option, it inadvertently led to police intervention. In a political state such as Argentina in the 1960s, involvement of the police on any level could cause measurable and significant harm to participants. While Wochenklauser’s boat cruises did not require their participants to partake in violence, it did ask them to open themselves up to the possibility of harm. In the case of the sex workers and activists that were present, they were asked to reveal their identities and actions to people that had the power to punish them. This raises questions around the ethics of violence for social change: is there a way for artists to balance art, violence and social change?

To explore this question, we can consider the early actions by Uruguay’s Tupamaros group. Similarly to Confinement Action, the early nonviolent acts of the Tupamaros movement sometimes did not go as planned. In the operation in which they stole and then returned 220 pounds of explosives from the government, the original plan of using the explosives was abandoned when it was deemed too dangerous. However, this operation diverges from that of Confinement Action in that the Tupamaros left a note explaining what the plan had been and why it was now being abandoned. To the audience, which in this case can be considered the general public, the Tupamaros’ intentions and the purpose of the piece were clear. The opacity so prevalent in House and Confinement Action is not present here and it can be assumed that by avoiding violence and revealing the intentions behind the operation, it had a greater capacity to impact the audience than if the original plan had been enacted or if the intentions of the Tupamaros had been concealed. The Tupamaros movement serves as an excellent example of non-opaque, nonviolent socially engaged art and we can learn a lot about how to address social problems from their early operations. It is unfortunate that as their movement progressed, their operations tended more and more to involving violence.

In conclusion, when looking for a work from which we can better understand how to address social problems we must consider the piece’s capacity for enacting real change as well as its capacity for violence. Whiteread’s House was too opaque, it’s message too unclear for a general audience to reach consensus about its meaning, minimizing its potential to positively address social problems. The capacity for social change of Confinement Action is almost impossible to measure, and it asked its participants to participate and be subjected to violence in order to prove a point about socio-political problems. The Tupamaros movement, while not enacted in the name of art, still fits comfortably within the definition of avant garde art and when the scope of inquiry is narrowed to the early Tupamaros actions, one can note that they were both effective at creating change and consistent with the general value of non-violence. However, towards the end of the group, many of their operations ended in violence, in a way the Wochenklauser boat cruises did not. While Wochenklausers boat cruises stretch the definition of art and avant garde art, they are a good work from which we could learn to address social problems, as they reached a solution that mitigated the negative effects of a social issue, facilitated lasting change and enacted minimal violence upon their participants.
