---
layout: narrative
title: WochenKlausur and the Reworking of the Avant-garde for Social Change
author: Jaimie Lopez
date: 26 September 2019
---

The avant-garde is art meant to shock, disrupt, and transform modern thinking.  Throughout time, the ways in which this art presents itself has changed, and this has led to a great debate in the art world on what true avant-garde art is, who it is meant for, and what it aims to do.  Beginning in 1993, the artistic collective known as WochenKlausur, in an effort to change the world they live in, pushed the definitions of art of the avant-garde even further, playing with accessibility, the social responsibility of the artist, and the modes in which art exists.  Their projects, deeply rooted in the idea that art can solve social problems, provide an artistic interventionist model that stresses the ability of art to promote change.  In this paper, I will focus on WochenKlausur’s work in Zurich in 1994, which showed the artist as the interventionist, directly involved within their societal role.  Through Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women (1994), we can see the avant-garde in a complex and socially-conscious light, challenging the traditional notions of elitism and violence in the avant-garde, and its ability to enact change in society.

To begin, I will contextualize the project.  In Zurich, as women who had become addicted to drugs became sex-workers, the stigmatization of their status opened them up to much violence.   They received a great deal of abuse from the police, which left them without a place to sleep during the day.  WochenKlausur, in order to aid these women, staged a series of talks over a few weeks which included powerful Swiss politicians, activists, journalists, and the affected women in question.  As orchestrated by the artist, these talks would take place on a boat, away from the city and in private quarters.  The performance of arriving to the boat, and then departing to talk is a power visual.  As they floated along the city, the visual of the boat served as a reminder to the city of Zurich of the talks that continued to happen concerning the fate of these homeless women. By allowing such conversations to happen in isolation, the politicians who would normally be forced to choose a side shed their role as politicians, and had the opportunity to listen and construct alongside the affected population.  This ritual was not a new idea, however.  WochenKlausur has staged many of these “interventions,” in which they address problems specific to the community they are serving, as explained on their mission statement: “... WochenKlausur has been developing concrete proposals aimed at small, but effective improvements to socio-political deficiencies”.  WochenKlausur ensured that the project was covered in the media in inviting journalists to the talks, and heavily publicized the performances in order to promote change.  Through a simple idea of facilitating a conversation, Wochenklausur created a piece that was both art and social practice.

In choosing artwork from class, I found this project to be the most confounding.  When discussing the methods of this piece, it is difficult to differentiate the art from the art-making process.  Is the art the repetitive performance of the participants as they arrived to travel on the boat?  This seems a bit reductive, as the goal of the piece was to produce structural change for the drug-addicted population of Zurich.  Is then not the product, the shelter for homeless women, the art of the project?  In class discussion surrounding the avant-garde, we can see how difficult it is to concretely define the practices of art very much in the same way as we struggle to define the art of WochenKlausur.  Perhaps, in insisting on defining the product or the value of the art piece, I am propagating the capitalist ideals of worth and production that many avant-garde artists have tried to disrupt.

The avant-garde has been subject to much discussion, under which different theorists posit their beliefs in terms of the intended audience, the need for accessibility, and how the art should affect the viewer.  Some believe that art exists in a vacuum, removed from any social obligation.  I would like to discuss the opinions of Claire Bishop, and her interpretation of the avant-garde and its interpretations, in order to highlight the difficulty of defining WochenKlausur’s work in a traditional manner.  In her essay “Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics,”  Bishop believes that many art critics have placed too much emphasis on the ethical side of art, rather than evaluating the aesthetic.  She feels that under this model, art is given more praise that it deserves, as she does not believe in the inherent value of art.  To contrast, in reading Kester’s introduction to the avant-garde in Conversations Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art, Kester makes a point about placing a value on the art of the avant-garde:

 “Avant-garde artists of various stripes believed that Western society (especially its urban middle class) had come to view the world in a violently objectifying manner associated with the growing authority of positivistic science and the profit-driven logic of the marketplace.  Under the influence of this perspective, people and things are are valued, not for their intrinsic worth, but for their potential to create wealth or promote industrial expansion.”

We can see that Bishop may have fallen into this mode of objectification.  In placing such a value on the aesthetic of the pieces, it is as if Bishop is saying that art only has value in its visual form, and that the visual can be separated from its context.

Bishop’s analysis of the avant-garde as aesthetic focus is not a model of analysis that we can apply to this piece.  The art we examine here cannot be isolated from its ethical practice, nor is this the intention of the artists.  This piece is performance, ritual, conversation, and had real life consequences:the piece was created to be more than a visual representation.  This art is fully invested in the social, and how its impact will last into the future.  Furthermore, I believe that Claire Bishop herself would have a difficult time pinpointing the aesthetics of this piece, and isolating them from their ethical implications.  This piece is also open to interpretation, valuing its ambiguity in order to create a dialogue not just between that parties on the boat, but a conversation between the artist and the audience.  To WochenKlausur, the practice of art cannot be removed from its context or its audience, rejecting traditional art practices and emphasising the need for socially engaged art.

There are other ways in which Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women rejects the history of the avant-garde.  If we describe the avant-garde as a shocking, violent form of activism, than these boat-talks both affirm and reject the traditional definitions of the avant-garde’s inherent violence.  The ritual, and the work as a whole, rested on the promise that the sex-workers were to share their stories in order to facilitate change.  It goes without saying that the other members at the table, such as political leaders and journalists, were not in the same position as these women, as sharing their stories was not required for the piece.  In that room, as these affected women shared their lives, they were subjecting themselves to violence through sharing their oppression and their traumas in order to enact change and help themselves.  Retrospectively, we can see how this experimental project could have ended in disaster, and could have meant meaningless suffering on the part of the homeless women involved.  In this position, these sex-workers were forced to affirm violent nature of the avant-garde at the hand of the artist.

On the other hand, if we look at the product of this project, the shelter for women, which itself can be considered the art of the project, we can see that this piece rejects the violent nature of the avant garde.  This shelter, in order to save them from the violence they faced daily from the police and the clients, becomes a place of healing for these women.  This is an important point of this model when discussing translating this model to other social problems around the world.  This disrupts, in a small way, the violence that these women faced every day.  This also disrupts the violent definitions of  avant-garde, and shows the possibility of healing through art.

Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women, in its final disruption of the classical avant-garde, makes its target audience homeless women.  Traditionally, the avant-garde was only accessible to the elite classes, as art critics posited that in order to fully understand the artistic intentions, one needed leisure time and a proper education.  The working classes were not educated in the same manner and did not have leisure time like the elite did, so inevitably the avant-garde becomes intentionally inaccessible to the working-class.  In an ongoing debate, art critics debate the merits of creating accessible art to all.  In a subversion of inaccessible critical avant-garde theories, WochenKlausur makes the main audience of the piece the drug-addicted women, and steered the focus away from the elite.  Who was waiting for the outcome of these talks more than the very people it would affect?  By publicizing the event, the art collective made the politicians participating in the talks accountable to these women through a public audience, drawing them into the project as well.  By centering the focus of their work on a very oppressed class of people, WochenKlausur defined the avant-garde as accessible for all.

All this being said, we can understand that this shelter is but a small solution to a larger problem surrounding poverty and violence towards the women in Zurich.  Examining the piece further, it seems that this form of the avant-garde can also push an idea of utopia through art.  In regards to the question as to how WocheKlausur’s Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women gives us a model to solve our modern-day problems, we can see that a simple idea caused an important change in Swiss society.  However, it feels a bit empty to say that conversations on a boat can solve large and systematic problems that affect people everyday.  Drug addiction is a problem that continues not just in Zurich, but all over the world, so can this model lend itself to other regions, and bring lasting change for all kinds of problems?  This brings up the question, can the avant-garde bring about change in such a large scale as needed to overthrow oppressive regimes and reform broken systems?

To answer this question, we can turn to WochenKlausur for some form of guidance.  In order to even create small change, the avant-garde must be accessible to all people, not just the elite.  Furthermore, if the avant-garde is meant to change public understanding, the art cannot exist in isolation.  The art and its methods will disrupt to a point where change is inevitable, which is what WochenKlausur believes is successful and worthwhile in artistic pursuit of the avant-garde.  Finally, there is an important point that the artistic group makes: not all problems can be solved in the same way, and not all places have the same problems.  WochenKlausur does research on the specific area in question, identifies a problem, and tailors their approach to that specific area.  This intervention in Zurich may not translate itself to an intervention in Guatemala City, as both of those cultures vary greatly.  Socially engaged art in the style of the avant-garde is at its most powerful when taking into account the culture it will affect.  In our class discussions of Camnitzer’s analysis of the Tupamaros in Uruguay and in pieces such as West Meets East (1992) by Lorrain Leeson, we are shown that culture surrounding the artist is crucial to the success of the art.  The avant-garde must take into account its surroundings in order to disrupt any convention in the most effective way, and bring lasting cultural and structural changes.  This specific model allows us to see the limits and the strengths of the avant-garde.  The artist as the interventionist is the idea we must examine as we discuss Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women (1994), and how it challenges the avant-garde to take the role of the activist artist.
