---
layout: narrative
title: West Meets East and the Fundamental Problem of the Avant Garde
author: Kaavya Arakoni
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

Avant garde art seeks to disrupt conventional systems and mainstream dialogue by changing the viewer’s perception through the artwork. It is primarily up to the viewer’s interpretation, but often tends to create emotions of shock or confusion within the viewer in an effort to make them “more receptive to the natural world.” Dialogical art is focused on the conversation and dialogue that the artwork creates after and even before it is complete. It often refers to art where the dialogue is crucial to and becomes a part of the art itself. The artwork that this essay discusses possesses aspects of avant garde art as well as dialogical art. West Meets East (1992) is an artwork that was produced by Loraine Leeson with the help of several Bengali girls and their teachers in a working class neighborhood in London. West Meets East intended to highlight the Bengali girls’ experiences with “living between cultures” and forming a new identity by intersecting their past experiences with their present experiences. West Meets East is a moving dialogical artwork about intersecting identities that does not adhere to the traditional aspects of avant garde framework, however it still seeks to alter the viewer’s perception of identity and culture in the way that ‘classic’ avant garde art aims to do. In this essay I will discuss the significance of West Meets East and its’ intention and how it contrasts the reception and impact of the artwork. Furthermore, I will discuss the role of the artist in affecting culture, what makes it a dialogical artwork, how it can be viewed through the avant garde framework and whether it belongs within that framework in any capacity. I will also discuss Rachel Whiteread’s House (1993) in order to contrast West Meets East and better understand the differences between avant garde and dialogical art and how this can affect an artwork’s social impact.

West Meets East is a mixed media artwork that has textiles surrounding a colourful picture of the hands of a Bengali girl sewing together a denim jacket and a sari, representing the merging of cultures. It was put up on a billboard on the Isle of Dogs. The girl’s hands have henna designs on them, a temporary body art that is painted on with nail polish instead of the traditional dye. The border contains embroidered words in Bengali and English, as well as images of the McDonalds and Coca Cola logos and scenes from life in Bangladesh. The method of production is also notable because a lot of the girls did not speak much English. Therefore, Leeson used “visual communication” by asking the girls to describe the cultural differences they felt through pictures and objects. This artwork is meaningful and resonates because of its discussion of the struggles and joys of being from two places. It helps me make sense of my world because of my experiences living in and feeling a sense of belonging to three different places. No one experience is less important or overshadowed by another, rather they coexist to form a complicated and intertwined identity. For immigrants particularly it can be hard to feel a sense of belonging and it can be a struggle to not feel like the ‘other.’ West Meets East captures a beautiful co-existence of the Bengali and English identities the girls have and the freedom to be wholly themselves.

In Conceptualism in Latin American Art, Luis Camnitzer discusses the role of the artist in affecting change on culture, either as an agitator or as a constructor. The artist as agitator is primarily presenting an opinion and trying to “disseminate” it. Camnitzer highlights the use of a “narrative” and “visual storytelling” used to communicate with the viewer. However, the artist as agitator is usually not as focused on affecting permanent cultural change or leaving a mark. In some ways, West Meets East resembles agitation in that it presents a clear opinion and stance on cultural identity and the values of cultural difference. Furthermore, it is unambiguous and straightforward in its “visual storytelling” and is presenting a different view that challenges the mainstream dialogue around the identity of being “foreign” and combats and agitates pre-existing racial stereotypes and tensions in the area. The artist as constructor is more focused on permanence and “[affecting] the ways of perceiving and… structural change.” However, the artist as constructor is seen as possessing more power and is perceived as less threatening. West Meets East can definitely be seen as construction in that it truly tackles perception and its intention is to serve as a symbol for a change of the times. However, the artists of West Meets East do not possess institutional power, and are instead most likely more suppressed by institutional norms of boundary and difference that often accompany immigration. Through analysing the role that West Meets East takes against the lenses of agitation and construction, it becomes clear that it possess aspects of both. The role of the artist is more complex than this model, and it would be reductive to think that “the aesthetics of agitation are at total odds with the aesthetics that correspond to shaping culture.” In order to construct, there is an element of agitation that must be involved. However, West Meets East uses this agitation to encourage rather than shock, although this goes against the typical avant garde framework.

West Meets East is a compelling artwork not only because of its message and the fact that its production took place through dialogue, but also because of its reception. In Conversation Pieces, Grant Kester highlights the lack of recognition West Meets East received– in fact, it received negative reception from some anti-immigrant groups in the form of vandalism. As artwork with relative aesthetic value and a clear social message, why did it receive little to no critical recognition? To answer this question, it is necessary to highlight the difference between dialogical art and avant garde art. Kester suggests that dialogical artists “encourage their participants to question fixed identities, stereotypical images… through a cumulative process of exchange and dialogue rather than a single instantaneous shock of insight.” Kester is essentially focusing on the idea that avant garde art does not involve conversation during the creation of the artwork, and is trying to incite shock rather than “encourage” its viewers. More than shock however, avant garde is centered in ambiguity. Avant garde theorists believe that art must be “[rendered] unpalatable to the appropriate powers of consumer culture.” They believe that there must be a dichotomy between aesthetics and mass culture, and the art must remain open to interpretation. Rachel Whiteread’s House was “based on the classic avant garde recipe of shock, disruption, and ambiguity.” House was created in one of London’s poorest neighborhoods, and created a huge uproar among the tenants of that neighborhood and much of the public. The artwork was a “poured concrete cast of the interior space” of a house that was scheduled for demolition, and it was only up for eleven weeks. No one could agree on what House was meant to represent or what statement it was making, if any. That ambiguity and uproar upon its unveiling was what made it “classic” avant garde. West Meets East does not, by most accounts, follow these ideas. Rather, it is proposing a clear message of the beauty in the merging of cultures to form a singular but binary identity, and its appeal relies on its collaborative production process. It is not trying to be ambiguous at all, because its purpose is to share and “encourage” viewers to understand that cultural differences do not inhibit belonging.

West Meets East’s status as a dialogical project increases its social impact but also pushes back against mainstream art critics’ mentality of the necessity of inaccessibility in art. In Conversation Pieces, Kester explains the aversion that some critics have towards aspects of dialogical art. The framework that these critics use to evaluate art does not take into account the most compelling aspect of dialogical art– the necessity of communication. Kester explains that the “formal, pleasure-based methodology” of evaluation does not consider the social dimensions of the artwork and therefore “dialogical works are criticized for being unaesthetic or are attacked for needlessly suppressing visual gratification.” To evaluate West Meets East without considering the visual communication used in the process of production or its message of a binary cultural identity is overwriting the significance of this artwork as a symbol of change. However, critics evaluate art in this way so as to make it remain inaccessible. Dialogical art requires open dialogue and exchange of ideas, but “the idea that a work of art should solicit participation and involvement so openly… is antithetical to dominant beliefs in both modernist and post modernist art and art theory.” Using this assumption, dialogical art is not considered art at all. The collaborative nature of dialogical art allows more viewers to identify with the art and makes it a shared artwork, rather than an exclusive one. West Meets East allowed the students who created the artwork to “establish a collective identity through the shared experience of producing the montage.” This aspect of the artwork is key to social impact that it has the power to make and the fact that the art is centered around the idea of a “collective identity” is what makes the art compelling. The aesthetic value of the artwork should be intrinsically connected to the motive and the impact, and to separate the two creates a divide between art theorists who privilege aesthetics and people who seek to grasp meaning from art through social impact.

West Meets East problematizes the avant garde framework in multiple ways that have already been discussed in this essay, but most significantly because of its intrinsic ties to a social, political and cultural stance. In Conversation Pieces, Kester discusses the theories of several prominent art critics and avant garde theorists, including Clive Bell and Clement Greenberg. Greenberg was insistent on the “autonomy of the aesthetic from social or political values.” Greenberg’s views are a step up from the belief discussed previously that art should not “solicit participation” and in fact he suggests that art should not have a motive beyond aesthetics. Bell goes even further, stating that “only visual forms that suppress any reference to recognizable objects are capable of eliciting aesthetic exaltation… the moment it acknowledges the specific cultural or historical context in which the viewer exists… it ceases to be art.” West Meets East would cease to exist if its creators were following that framework. There would be no artwork without the Bengali girls’ “specific cultural context,” there would be no sense of a “collective identity” and there would certainly be no social impact. West Meets East is fundamentally opposed to the avant garde framework if it must adhere to ambiguity, obscurity, and inaccessibility. The elitism of avant garde art and its privileged art theorists and critics is the main barrier that West Meets East faces.

Loraine Leeson’s West Meets East is a persuasive artwork that celebrates the merging of two cultures to form a “collective identity.” The artists challenge the norms of the role an artist must take on of agitation or construction, and seek to affect change through changing perceptions around culture. The aspects of West Meets East that distinguish it as a dialogical project are what make it compelling, such as the collaborative production and the focus on having a social impact. If inaccessibility and opacity were not given as much importance in the avant garde art framework, West Meets East might be considered avant garde. The artwork still aims to disrupt mainstream dialogue and stereotypes, however it does this without aiming to incite shock or anger. By encouraging its viewers to question these mainstream ideas, it can accomplish the same thing as traditional avant garde art – making them “more receptive to the natural world.”

Word Count: 2100

Bibliography

 Grant Kester. Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art. University of California Press: Berkeley, 2011.

 Luis Camnitzer. Conceptualism in Latin American Art: Didactics of Liberation. Austin: Texas University Press, 2007.
