---
layout: narrative
title: The Tupamaros
author: Kieran Huang
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

The Tupamaros are unlike any other art we have discussed in class, in that they were not intended to be viewed as art. Furthermore, instead of existing as a single project, they are an organized group which carried out many operations over the course of about 11 years. Unlike other guerrilla groups, the Tupamaros’ goal was not to incite the revolution, but to make the public attuned enough to the political and social environment in Uruguay, that revolution would be inevitable. I chose the Tupamaros for my topic because they seemed to simultaneously be the most resistant to artistic interpretation and the most socially and politically impactful. The main goal of this paper is to explore how the Tupamaros mode of social change can be viewed through an avant-garde art lens.

The Tupamaros are difficult to place directly as avant-garde art, as that was not the intentions of the group, however, the aesthetics of their movement allows them to be analyzed as such. It is interesting in this way to see how the Tupamaros address aspects of avant-garde art. This is especially interesting in regards to viewing the avant-garde as a symbolic military force. The avant-garde has traditions of disrupting belief systems that enforce hegemonic power, and there is a question as to what extent was the Tupamaros symbolically militaristic and physically militaristic. The Tupamaros advocated for bloodlessness, but also were armed. The mostly nonviolent nature and aesthetics of the Tupamaros lends itself to more symbolic readings, although their heists are literally disruptive to the state and seem more militaristic. In line with the thinking of avant-garde art and the likes of Stuart Hall, the Tupamaros’ method was cultural warfare. Another relevant question to the avant-garde is the readability or opacity of the Tupamaros. One one hand, the Tupamaros’ pedagogical messages were quite clear and easily understandable to the masses (as they were the target audience). On the other hand, when asked to be viewed as art the Tupamaros become extremely opaque as they use experimental modes of aesthetics. These aesthetics are what most connects the Tupamaros to an artistic framework.

The aesthetics of the Tupamaros directly relate to their goal of grabbing public attention and sympathy. What actions seem to be most willing to be read in the framework of art aesthetics are the graffiti highlighting the bullet holes in public spaces. These can be compared to street art traditions. This practice aligns the Tupamaros with grassroots revolutionaries. Like this the attention given to the Tupamaros was not just from their projects’ results, but also (if not more so) from their methods. Another art tradition connection can be made with the Tupamaros public activities and that of theater. The Tupamaros create spectacle in fantastical ways. The grandiose actions of selfishness simultaneously are sincerely rooted in the painful political climate of Uruguay at the time and also have a sort of absurdist satirical aspects about them. The way the Tupamaros act with extreme politeness and care while enacting large heists mocks the current political system in both their greed and lack of joy. For example, when the Tupamaros stole the equivalent of 220,000 dollars from the San Rafael Casino by dressing as policemen, and then offering to return the money corresponding to the tips of the employees. The intricacies of the heist such as dressing up as policemen, and then unexpectedly offering to return the money created an entertaining story that drew attention. Even the way that the group distributed pamphlets to a crowd during a popular annual fair through a mechanical box contraption drew spectacle.

Through many projects a public mythology was created by and around the Tupamaros. The Tupamaros seemed to act as a group of incorruptible vigilantes exposing the government’s desperation to maintain hegemonic control and order, even the foreign press characterized the Tupamaros as “Robin Hoods” (Camnitzer, 44). Over and over again they had successful bank robberies, as well as stealing a truckload of food and distributing among locals for Christmas. These displays were affective and entertaining, creating sympathy and inspiration to the public. In 1977, a book published by the armed forces reflecting on their strategies writes: “these actions try to present the methods of the Police and Government as clumsy and inefficient, so that the organization may appear, [while] ridiculing them, installed on the cusp of imagination and ingenuity” (Camnitzer, 48). Another example is depositing a package with 220 pounds of explosive gelignite to the home of an army bomb expert. The explosives were left with a note explaining that they were too dangerous for what the Tupamaros had in mind. This act is especially poignant in that on the surface level it did not disrupt the police or state, and did not create any explicit social change. However, this event still impacted their public image and can be seen as pure theater and spectacle. These types of projects are explicit examples of cultural warfare. Similar projects include the bullet-hole graffiti, and the stealing of a notable flag representing liberation from a museum (and promising to return it when the political climate allows).

The Tupamaros mode of influence was to control time. They’re public displays were unable to to be ignored and held everyone involved hostage to bear witness to their actions. As Nico Poulantzas writes, “the capitalist state… monopolizes the organization of time and space that become, by the action of the state, networks of domination and power” (Camnitzer, 57). By disrupting public spaces and forcefully taking the time of the public, the Tupamaros effectively also stole time from the state, providing spectacle in lieu of hegemony. This drastic redefining of controlled time can shock the public into seeking to control their own time. This can even be seen on an individual scale with the “People’s Jail”, in which the captives were treated well, but were held until they changed. The “People’s Jail” was also a more readable case of dialogical art in which the interrogations and conversations between the Tupamaros and their captors existed in a separate space made to reduce or expunge political and social pressures. In the case of Claude Fly, an American Agency for International Development advisor, who was jailed for seven months (August 7, 1970 - February 27, 1971) , in which after his release he “refused to give any information to the police and maintained friendly correspondence with some of his captors” (Camnnitzer, 51). Through the extreme taking of time, the Tupamaros changed the minds of even those in power. This shows that through the monopolization of time, capitalist and state structures can become normalized, which makes their disruption so much more important.

As a guerilla group, it is helpful to view the Tupamaros revolutionary agenda in terms of Debray’s philosophy of foco. Debray thinks that revolutionary change involves a guerilla organization that motivates and sets examples for the rest of the peasants and urban working class. In this way, Debray argues that the guerilla group should have a certain level of consciousness in their actions. These actions would then inform the actions of the rest of the revolution allowing for more controlled spontaneous actions from the masses (Kester, 9). However,when talking about the Tupamaros, Debray emphasized their spontaneity in saying “everything is to be reinvented every time on location” (Camnitzer, 48). In this way the Tupamaros seem to be completely based around spontaneity, however, they still have a level of consciousness through their discipline. The values of the Tupamaros, as evident in the “Open Letter to the Police”, were defined and carefully constructed. Furthermore, the group was created by “mostly members of the Socialist Party and dissidents of Anarchist Federation” (Camnitzer, 44).

In influencing the people to resist, Debray says, the foco must create ‘exemplary violence’. The Tupamaros shows this ‘exemplary violence’ through their operations that have been expressed throughout this essay. The exemplary nature of it comes from the Tupamaros alignment with the masses. Unlike the intelligentsia of Lenin, all the members of the Tupamaros showed a clear understanding of the risks and realities of oppression since they were risking their lives. The Tupamaros did a lot of community work such as food distribution and smaller projects such as the graffiti position the Tupamaros as being within the community of the masses instead of without. The Tupamaros are anonymous by name and act as a collective. In this way to identify with a collective of the masses is to identify with the Tupamaros, and the ‘exemplary violence’ that they create is personally identified with. The actions of the Tupamaros are experiential, not only for the Tupamaros themselves and the state they fight against, but also all of the witnesses and bystanders. The fact that the group did not openly align with any political party furthers the idea of their message being experientially didactic.

In understanding how successful the Tupamaros and their methods were, it is important to understand their failures. The main failures of the Tupamaros was when they didn’t keep to their own established behaviors and ideologies. The bloodlessness acts as the most clear example. While, over the course of their 11 active years, the Tupamaros had caused very few deaths (around 100) compared to expectations of guerrilla and militant groups, the deaths that it did cause were extremely harmful. Especially for example, the case of Dan Mitrione, a former  American chief of police who was sent to Montevideo to teach police torture techniques. He was expected to be traded for imprisoned guerilla members, but when the negotiation fell through he was executed. As Camnitzer puts it: “although there was no question of the criminal status of Mitrione, the execution, in August of 1971, seriously damaged the image of the whole movement” (Camnitzer, 50). This death was particularly bad because of the intentionality of it. As opposed to deaths when guerrilla and police forces met, this death felt more avoidable. The absurdist aesthetic that the Tupamaros had garnered was shattered by the decision to end a person’s life. The Tupamaros were ultimately ended due to increased surveillance and new torture techniques both supported by the United States government. This tragically brings into question whether a similar resistance could exist today, and the Orwellian nature of nation-states today.

The Tupamaros dismantle the separation between art and politics. The fact that the Tupamaros’ goals were never specifically artistic and expelled notions of hegemonic institutions in some views strengthens its place as avant-garde art. When compared to the beliefs of avant-garde art experts in the 1968 Argentinian “First National Meeting of Avant-Garde Art” The Tupamaros match every agreed upon point: “(1) the development of art could no longer consist of the creation of an avant-garde movement; (2) art could no longer be shown in galleries or museums; (3) art could no longer be restricted to addressing only an elite public; (4) art had to challenge society and achieve results similar to those of political actions, but in a more long-lasting manner and on a deeper cultural level.” (Camnitzer, 64). Furthermore, at an artist protest and sit-in against the police removal of anti-government artwork at Instituto Di Tella in Argentina in 1968, one of the speakers, Juan Pablo Renzi, spoke, “We believe that art signifies an active engagement with reality, active because it aspires to transform this class society into a better one. . . . As a consequence, we declare that the life of ‘Che’ Guevara and the actions of the French students are works of art of greater importance than the majority of the stupidities hanging on the walls of the thousands of museums around the world… Down with all the institutions, long live the art of the Revolution.” (Camnitzer, 62). Certainly if revolutionaries such as “Che” Guevara are considered art, than the Tupameros can be viewed in a similar lens. Although the Tupamaros as a guerrilla organization was dismantled by state and police domination, over the course of more than a decade of work, the Tupamaros disrupted the state and police and created political consciousness in large substantial ways, much more so than comparable projects such as that of Tucuman Arde.
