---
layout: narrative
title: A look at engaging with cultures and identities not related to the artist sense of self
author: Liya Harris-Harrell
date: 26 September 2019
---

As the initiation of the Art of Change project, Loraine Leeson worked with Bengali teens to facilitate the creation of the artwork West Meets East (1992). The project’s overall goal was to “develop collaborative projects with community groups, schools, women’s organizations, and other constituencies in the Docklands and East London.” (Kester, 2004, p.22) The piece, West Meets East, was a photographic montage that was displayed as a billboard photomural. It was displayed in several parts of East Long and Docklands. The piece displayed a central image of a Bengali girl’s hands at a sewing machine joining together two items of clothing––a sari and a jean jacket. On the frame of the image was a collage. The collage included images related to Bengali culture and popular culture found in England; in addition to, text that had specific words written in both English and Bengali. This piece was displayed for the general public to view. To provide context to the viewer, the piece was accompanied by a plague directly below the photomural. The text provided was in both English and Bengali. Although the piece did not receive wide recognition for the work that it did, it still has influential merit both in the community that it was made for and within the larger discussion of socially engaged art.

East Meets West (1992) is an important piece of media due to its discussion on how to include specific identities into the conversation about an artwork during its creation. When interacting with a community outside of one’s own, it is important that the individual is mindful of the stereotypes and stigmas that can exist. There are many ways in which to do this, but both East Meets West and Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women (February and March 1994, February 1995) tackle this by highlighting and bringing attention to the voices of these communities. Leeson’s work with the Bengali girls does more to highlight their experiences in both its individual and community nature. That is to say that it gives a voice to the individuality of experiences for this specific population, but also works to extend to a greater idea of interconnectedness that could apply to different experiences of joint cultures. Furthermore, works that highlight communities outside of our own, teach us how to take care and earn the trust of other populations. It is important, as an artist or an individual, to want to find ways to bring attention to or support others in meaningful ways. However, our intentions as an individual means nothing if the resulting product does not take the means or considerations needed to address those we are highlighting before we take the idea out into the larger world. In a world where news is increasingly globalized through social and digital media, there can be a tendency to forget about who we are trying to effect change for in the presence of so many outlying factors.

In comparison to the other pieces discussed in class that are avant-garde, West Meets East there is relatively little information surrounding the piece. While the artwork did not receive press or discussion from the art community, it gives valuable insight on the collective narrative of the art-making process. In my opinion, this piece tells us a lot about socially engaged art and the kind of impact it can have. As mentioned by Kester, “…it enjoyed none of the publicity of Whiteread’s work…” (Kester, 2004, p.22); the fact that this piece did not receive publicity is one of the reasons that I thought it had value to add to the conversation on how to address current social and political issues. This coincides with one of the questions it raised for me, “what do we make of pieces that have a social impact, but are not discussed as a larger community—whether the art community or the individual community that houses the discourse?”  Another reason why I chose the artwork had to do with the cultural population that Leeson chose to work with. Specifically, for that it is a community so removed from her own and the age group of the participants that she chooses to work with. In a time, currently, where young people can be dismissed for their age, when sharing their own experiences, it is powerful to see someone with some social standing use this to provide a platform to provide their unique experience without immediately being discounted. While Leeson defines herself as “…less an object maker than as an artist who facilitates shared visions” (Kester, 2004, p.24) the piece raised the question as who should get recognition for a collaborative piece such as this. As Leeson is credited with the piece for creating The Art of Change project and helping to facilitate the final project for the Bengali girls does this really qualify defining her as the artist for the larger idea surrounding this exchange? In addition, I raise the question that “when creating with cultures outside your own what kind of trust is necessary for the works progress and competition?”   Some additional questions that the piece raised for me, but did not coincide with a reason why I chose the piece are: “What are the larger implications for a piece that is meant to give voice to a specific community?”, “What is the necessity of dialogue that take place for certain pieces both during and prior to the process of creation?”, “Can a piece of art be avant-garde without directly challenging a sense of complacency”

The artist as a sniper, is a model for artist that requires them to have a specific skill set. It requires them to have a specific goal and that there should be distance between the artist and their intended audience. In more concise terms, the artist as a sniper, focuses on a specific social or political issue in an organized and calculated manor. The ways in which Leeson follows the model is through how she organized and help to create the final product. First off, she works with a specific group of individuals, the Bengali teens. Overall, Leeson’s project “The Art of Change” had the purpose to “give voice to those with first-hand knowledge of issues, and a pro-active approach to creating alternatives rather than relying on protests in its cultural activism” Although this project had big goals, it dedicated time to each one individually allowing for specific areas to shine through in the process. In addition to the specific goal of giving Bengali teens a way to express themselves in an environment that they had newly arrived in, the way in which Leeson facilitates and approaches the subject matter also utilizes the method of artist as a sniper. This is highlighted in the way that she approaches the goal of giving a voice to those with first-hand knowledge. By asking the teens to bring in images that “…expressed something about who they felt themselves to be,” she made sure that the collective voice of these individuals was the focal point of the piece. Even the way in which Leeson displays the teens collective image creates a distance between the audience and the artist. Shown through how the photomurals were placed on billboards in the East London area. Furthermore, the process of creating this art piece acts like that of a case study. This can be seen in how Leeson asks the Bengali teens to talk to each other and bring in images. For reference, Leeson noted that a majority of these girls did not know any English or had just recently moved to the area. By working with teens with similar backgrounds this aligns with the idea that the artist as a sniper hones in by working with or highlighting a specific social or political issue.

While Leeson had clear goals in mind when implementing West Meets East as an extension of The Art of Change project, there are some potential goals that can be derived out of the overall message. Firstly, it was to give a voice to Bengali teens within their own community. As stated by Kester, “…to organize a process that gave form, complexity, and some measure of clarity to the cultural ruptures and differences that her collaborators were dealing with in their daily lives.” (Kester, 2004, p. 24)  In addition to the goal of providing these teens with an outlet of some form, there is also the potential of trying to make a social impact by making  this work available to the larger community. This social impact can be seen in the following way: bringing awareness to the community. Not just the individual community that these teens were a part of as a form of family life, but also the larger east London society. Those without immediate knowledge or access to understanding how these teens go through and interact with the world. Bringing awareness to the community’s experience as teens who moved from a different country can fight against the possibility of anti-immigrant sentiments that existed in the area. We as outside observers know that there were negative feelings surrounding this community because Kester noted that some of the billboards had been damaged. From this we could hypothesize that part of the reason that Leeson made the project so public was to bring these identities held by the girls to the forefront. To illustrate a narrative that many (im)migrant children could relate to whether or not they were Bengali. She could have wanted to further highlight this idea of cultures coming together as opposed to separation that some might have thought was more relevant at the time.

While West Meets East (1992) does not meet the qualifier of Avant-Garde art based on the fact that it does not “attack” or “challenge” social norms in the traditional sense, the focus and method of creating the piece should still qualify it as such. Instead the work acts as a way to focus awareness on an important part of identity without challenging the viewer’s complacency. Rather than focus on complacency, I think that this piece focuses on a different emotional strife, “ignorance.” The difference in the two is that ignorance can be a lot more harmful to outlying communities than that of complacency. Highlighting that cultures can come together and can influence one another without losing the quintessential parts of what makes them separate.  The way in which this piece brings attention to the pre-existing framework of Avant-Garde art is in how the artist uses her platform to bring the teens’ voices to the front of the conversation. This is in contrast with others forms of avant-garde art because its dialogical nature that does not directly involve the voice of the artist in either the process of creation nor the final product. I think that this piece expands on the ways in which Avant-Garde art can challenge pre-existing ideas that people hold while calling on a different mode to get people to think about about someone’s ideas about self or and identity without shock. As West Meets East (1992) seems to be less of a piece about introspection of self and more about community relations.

In the frameworks discussed in class West Meets East by Loraine Leeson is a piece of socially engaged art that borders on the line of being Avant-Garde. By raising questions of the outlying community and existing as a point of dialogue for individuals who were involved in the creation of the piece it provides context to the ways in which culture can become interconnected with other cultures or within one’s own identity. I think that it is important to keep in mind the ways in which artist and activist speak and uplift social and political issues going on in the world around us. That is important for these individuals to also consider the impacts that their works have and the best ways in which they can navigate them in the future.
