---
layout: narrative
title: Tucumán Arde, Revolution, and the Fate of the Avant-Garde
author: Max Gruber
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

In 1968, a group of artists banded together in one of the most significant and boundary-pushing instances of political art ever attempted. The modernist tradition prized the sanctity of the art object and its ability to transcend the banality of the human lived experience in service of something greater. Yet, the apogee of modernism was succeeded by new conceptions of art, new avant-gardes, and new issues that drove artists to experiment with form, medium, and, critically, politics as well. Situated in a moment of intense political turmoil and artistic reimagination, Tucumán arde fundamentally altered the way art, content, and social issues were thought about in Latin America and the world. Tucumán arde exemplifies an important artistic address of social issues because of its direct engagement with political action, its incorporation of contemporaneous revolutionary and artistic ideology, as well as the way in which it contended and engaged with concepts of the avant-garde, redefining the term in the work’s own image.

Far from being a singular artistic event, Tucumán arde unfolded through a series of actions and interventions which were highly contentious not just for their political implications, but also for their status as “art”. In his book Latin American Conceptualism, artist and writer Luis Camnitzer narrates and analyzes the events which comprised Tucumán arde and its aftermath. Much of the impetus for the work was born out of the oppressive political climate in Argentina during the late ‘60s. In the midst of a military dictatorship which had recently censored a number of works exhibited at the Instituto de Tella in Buenos Aires, a number of artists took their works to the street, destroying them in symbolic protest. The project Tucumán arde was born out of a collection of artists’ desire to respond to the military government’s implementation of a “fictional industrialization plan” in the northwestern province of Tucumán. Drawing on the expertise of sociologists, economists, journalists, and photographers, the collective took several trips to the region to collect data, conduct interviews, and more, obscuring their true intentions from the authorities all the while. The finished product included, “collected interviews with the people about living conditions in Tucumán, mural photographs, and research about the accumulation of wealth by the richer families,” all presented in the Confederación General del Trabajo (CGT) building in the city of Rosario. Details such as the serving of unsweetened coffee, meant to highlight the extent of the sugar-producing region’s economic depression, and flashing lights to signify the frequency of infant mortality all added to a spectacle which blurred the lines of investigative journalism, installation art, and activism. Despite a two week run in Rosario, the exhibition was closed by the state a mere two days after its opening in the capital. While on the surface Tucumán arde presents a confused intersection of disciplines that lead to minimal political action, its value is amplified upon a closer examination of its methods and strategies. Specifically, how these methods were in conversation with dominant currents of marxist revolutionary thought and the emerging conceptual art movement at the time. Furthermore, Tucumán arde presents a valuable case study in the evolution of the term avant-garde, not just in the ‘60s, but also in more contemporaneous scholarly debate as well.

Through its reframing of the social reality in Tucumán, Tucumán arde drew upon strategies of subversion, agitation, and construction that became central to the growing movement of Latin American conceptualism at the time. In his chapter “Agitation or Construction?” Luis Camnitzer describes how Latin American artists formed during the 1950s and 60s increasingly sought to find a synthesis between the dissemination of discourses (agitation) and the construction of cultural change through more traditional channels (construction). Considering these strategies, Tucumán arde presents a unique case of both agitation and construction. Through the group’s graffiti campaigns which transformed the widely circulated “Tucumán” posters meant to promote the group’s supposed “cultural documentary” into “Tucumán arde,” the group was unquestionably implementing Camnitzer’s view of agitation. However, Tucumán arde’s impact lay mainly in the actual content of its exhibition, carefully investigated and constructed by the artists and their collaborators. In this way, the exhibition managed to balance cultural construction with the dissemination of discourse. The key element in this synthesis of strategies is what Camnitzer describes as subversion, an element common to cultural construction and agitation, especially in the context of Latin American conceptualism. Camnitzer describes subversion, saying, “To subvert a situation means to create a perceptual distance from the status quo, one that prompts reevaluation and elicits the will to make changes.” In this case, Tucumán arde looked to create a perceptual distance from the government’s failed “industrialization plan,” alienating this fabricated reality through their extensive documentation, interviews, and other interventions such as the light and the coffee. Camnitzer continues, saying, “Subversion allows for the introduction of common sense and the missing justice into stultified conditions.” The idea that subversion is a tool to be used in stultified conditions, that is, to promote a sense of urgency where there was complacency, lies at the heart of Tucumán arde’s objective. The work sought to motivate the Argentine public to see how the state had lied to them, abused them, and boldly misrepresented this abuse. This intervention into stultified conditions is also significant outside of the context of Camnitzer’s analysis of agitation and construction in Latin American conceptualism. Tucumán arde acted upon and as part of this trend, certainly, but it was also responding to a number of similar strategies articulated not by the art world, but by revolutionary politics.

Camnizter reflects on Tucumán arde’s strategic, medium defying consciousness, saying, “Art is only expected to define and refine its own formal rules, and not to redefine itself as political activity.” In his article “The Sound of Breaking Glass,” Grant Kester more closely examines the implications of this statement, analyzing Tucumán arde through a lense of revolutionary political thought. Using Graciela Carnevale’s (one of the artists involved in Tucumán arde) work, Acción de encierro, as an example, Kester elaborates on the concept of “exemplary violence,” a marxist revolutionary strategy meant to “awaken a previously quiescent working class and precipitate an insurrection that would otherwise be deferred.” In an artistic context, works such as Acción de encierro were meant to move the Argentine public from a state of “passive acquiescence to conscious agency.” Despite its controversial and symbolically violent gesture of locking participants in the gallery, Acción de encierro retained much of the intention of Tucumán arde. The intervention of Tucumán arde was an “exemplary violence” in that it exemplified the violence of the state without crossing the line itself. And yet, the impact of Tucumán arde in raising consciousness and drawing attention to the issue at hand was far greater than that of Acción de encierro, which failed due to its participants unwillingness to partake in Carnevale’s game. Whatever its tangible effectiveness in Argentine politics, the value of Tucumán arde as a non-violent provocation cannot be understated, especially as Kester points to more contemporary examples of artwork such as those by Santiago Sierra that rely precisely on these “violent” interventions in order to implicate their viewers and generate consciousness.

The genesis of this “exemplary violence” can be better understood by examining the Revolutionary strategies of Regis Debray and Che Guevara. Kester traces the evolution of marxist Revolutionary thought from Lenin to Debray, noting their methodological differences and comparing them to avant-garde art movements in turn. A particularly helpful model for understanding Tucumán arde is the foquismo model. Debray believed that:
the focquistavanguard, in its single-minded commitment to military action, will model a proper revolutionary discipline for emulation by the peasants and working-class, “imbuing” them with revolutionary fervor. The “small motor” of the foco will bring the “big motor” of the masses to political consciousness, and “set them in motion.”

This strategy of a small group of committed persons working to call a larger group to consciousness and action is clearly reflected in Tucumán arde. Here, the artists, functioning as a small, singularly committed cell, had used their exhibition in the CGT as the “small motor” which they hoped would jumpstart the “big motor,” maybe not of marxist revolution per se, but certainly of greater social and political commitment from the Argentine public. Further similarities to the foco model are evident when discussing the geography of Tucumán arde in its production. Camnitzer notes that the artists’ outlook, like that of the guerrilla, “came from the provinces rather than from the capital. They were the product of a double colonization, in which mainstream values in art were first imported and adopted in Buenos Aires, and then after being digested there, were added to the national canon.” More significant still than the artist’s origin was the fact that their artistic “ammunition” and their content came from the even more rural and less centrally located Tucumán. While the region was selected more so for its economic woes and governmental failure than for Debray’s conception of the countryside as the “loci of authentic Revolutionary insight” the rural-urban dynamic of Tucumán arde remains a significant thread in the project’s connection to Revolutionary politics. In light of his statement that “Power is seized and held in the capital, but the road that leads the exploited to it must pass through the countryside,” it seems significant that the trajectory of Tucumán arde would begin with one of the country’s most isolated regions and end in Buenos Aires after a mere two days on view.

The impact of Tucumán arde resonates even further than its harmony with Revolutionary politics, as the artwork deeply problematized the traditional avant-garde framework at the time. In his book, Conversation Pieces, Kester describes modern art critics’ attribution of an opacity to avant-garde art, that is, a barrier which hampered viewer’s understanding of and engagement with the artwork. This barrier, in the critics view, was essential to the combating of kitsch and avoiding the pollution of true art. Tucumán arde eschews all opacity in the interest of communicating its message as effectively as possible. Furthermore, Tucumán arde aimed to address every social class in a unique way, either by attempting to transplant political consciousness or to implicate the viewer as a member of the bourgeoisie. This was a far cry from the former conception of the avant-garde which held that only those who were properly trained to view avant-garde art should bother.
As concepts of the avant-garde began to evolve, artists such as Allan Kaprow undertook events referred to as “happenings” that moved the concept of the avant-garde away from the medium specificity of high modernism and towards more experiential pieces. Despite this aperture of possibility in the avant-garde, Tucumán arde remained ahead of its time. Kaprow said that “Political awareness may be everyone’s responsibility, but political expertise belongs to the politician.” Despite his innovations in avant-garde art, Camnitzer notes that “in his [Kaprow’s] approach the social status quo remained untouched.” Not so with Tucumán arde, a work which was firmly and unapologetically political. One of its participants observed this incongruity, saying, “Tucumán arde used art to make politics. The greatest part of political art use politics as a subject matter to make art.” Even Europe’s newest and most progressive revision of the avant-garde had proved unable to grapple with the intervention of Tucumán arde. Highly aware of this fact, the artists involved had met as part of what they called the “First Encounter of Avant-Garde Art.” Before they had even begun on Tucumán arde, they elaborated a new vision of what avant-garde art could and should be. This vision included the end of avant-garde “movements,” the end of art in galleries and museums, greater access, and art which challenged society through political action that was more deeply cultural and impactful. In this way, Tucumán arde did more than challenge avant-garde art: it destroyed it and reshaped it in its own image.

Despite its emergence long after Tucumán arde ended, more contemporary concepts such as that of dialogical art prove to be relevant frameworks through which to analyze Tucumán arde. Kester describes the dialogical practice as art which is part of a dialogue between the artist and another group from outside the traditional artistic context. Here, the, “emphasis is on the character of this interaction, not the physical or formal integrity of a given artifact or the artist’s experience in producing it.” While most of Kester’s examples include artworks as old as the 1990s such as WochenKlauser’s Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women, Tucumán arde assumes many of these characteristics in an artwork realized decades earlier. The way artists collaborated with sociologists, photographers, media outlets, and the citizens of Tucumán themselves are a significant element of the piece’s impact. The fact that much of the exhibition was achieved as a result of these diverse interactions and multiple perspectives is similar to the collaboration between politicians, experts, and prostitutes that became Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women. Despite its many affinities, it would be simplistic to label Tucumán arde as completely dialogical. Kester notes that the quality of a dialogical artwork lies in the character of the interaction. While the interactions and dialogues that made up Tucumán arde are essential, they are ultimately in service of a larger political message and exhibition. The dialogue between the citizens of Tucumán and the artists is not the true subject of the work. Instead, it is the political abuse and message of state failure that primarily guides Tucumán arde. Despite this, Tucumán arde’s many affinities with these later dialogical works speaks to the project’s vision and its value as an artwork that would predict the future of the avant-garde.

Tucumán arde represents, at once, a political statement and a social phenomenon, a synthesis of political and artistic strategies, the articulation of a new vision of avant-garde art, and a collaborative project that presaged works that would come decades later. And yet, the artwork may have been a failure if viewed solely in the context of political action. There was no greater action that followed the exhibition in Buenos Aires and the artists themselves suffered from a number of crises that prevented them producing work afterwards. Camnitzer even dedicates an entire chapter to the “silence” of the artworld after Tucumán arde. Despite this, the work succeeded in using art to make politics and rose above its contemporaneous artworks and events to stand alone as a unique endeavor in socially-engaged art. If it seems daunting to understand the impact of how Tucumán arde blurred the lines of art, politics, Revolution, and the avant-garde it may be because the artists who participated in the project came to view it as “the ultimate extreme of the notion of conceptualism, after which one couldn’t produce any conceptual work or any other [kind of art]...” Scholars will always be able to return to Tucumán arde, continually re-interrogating its successes and failures in order to frame our analysis of those boundary-pushing works still to come.

Works Cited

Camnitzer, Luis. Conceptualism in Latin American Art : Didactics of Liberation 1st ed. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2007. 19, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71

Kester, Grant H. Conversation Pieces : Community and Communication in Modern Art Updated edition. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013. 10, 35

Kester, Grant H. “The Sound of Breaking Glass Part I: Spontaneity and Consciousness in Revolutionary Theory.” e-flux journal #30. December 2011. 3, 9, 10

Kester, Grant H. “The Sound of Breaking Glass Part II: Agonism and the Taming of Dissent.” e-flux journal #30. December 2011. 11
