---
layout: narrative
title: Applying Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women
author: Mike Trainor
date: 26 September 2019
week: one
---

In 1994, the Swiss museum Shedhalle reached out to WochenKlausur (WK) to advertise the museum’s newfound ideology that the artistic and political worlds needn’t be separated.  In Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women (IAW), politicians, journalists, police, lawyers, and sex workers were invited onto a boat to discuss how the current treatment of drug-addicted and homeless sex workers in Zurich could be changed.  There were several conversations, and they all happened in private on the boat in the middle of Lake Zurich.

IAW both followed and challenged traditional avant-garde standards of the time.  Avant-garde, discussed by Grant Kester in his Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art, is that which tries to challenge the viewer’s notions of viewership and art, forcing them to contemplate new or unusual forms of experience, challenging how art is viewed and the very idea of what art is or what art can be.  Another focus of Kester is “dialogical” versus “banking” art: art that takes value from discussion about it is dialogical, compared to the typical way of presenting art in which an artist “deposits” an idea in a work and viewers “withdraw” that idea as an interpretation.  IAW is dialogical avant-garde, but also seeks to meld the artistic and political worlds.  In this way, it’s doing more than your typical avant-garde performance.

## A model for discussing current social issues

An important part of IAW was it’s inclusion of those for whom Zurich’s policies were being adjusted: the sex workers.  It’s notable that the art project was considered a success, given that afterwards there were shelters built and maintained so that homeless sex workers could sleep during the day and worry less about pimps and police officers.  If a policy is going to directly impact a group of people, it might make a substantial difference in the policy’s effectiveness if those people are consulted while the policy is being made or formulated.

## Personal interests and applications

My background, and my passion, is with board games.  I make board games in my free time, and I hope for it to be my primary job one day.  The most important part of the development process, the only way to know if I’ve been working in the right direction, is to test the board game with new players.  Without testing the game, I have no idea if it will be fun, if the rules will make sense, or if anything in the game is broken.  I see this art piece as a way of “testing” a political policy.  If I were to sell a board game that is untested by the target demographic, it’s likely that several parts of the game won’t work well.  There will be errors, small or large, that could have been easily avoided if I had played a game or two with real people, instead of just sitting down with the rules and guessing how people would play.  Policy makers might have the same issue, and should seek the same solution.  If a policy is going to directly affect someone, why not “test” it with them?  Get a group of people together, some in the target demographic and some not, and tell them what the policy is.  How would they react to the policy?  Would they be opposed to it, or to some facets of it?  Not only does this make for more empathetic policy, but it puts the policy makers in good standing with a population (in the case of IAW, it makes politicians look good to voters, which would come in handy during the election).

Now, can we use this model to discuss other things?  I proposed using it for working on board games, but I ask this question with a more grand scale in mind.  Hypothetically, all policy could be made alongside those who are impacted by it.  It might take longer, and the result might not always be what was expected, but it seems like a step in the right direction.  Everyone wants their voice to be heard, so why not listen?

Can we use it outside of the political sphere?  Talking to customers in any industry is a way to start improving a product or service.  Executives can read reviews or reach out to regular customers and ask their opinion, and if there’s a consensus on a request to change, executives have the power to change it.  Even this executive example is slightly political; should we make our everyday decisions in this manner?  For small tasks that only affect a few people, it’s easy enough to make that decision for them just by considering how they’d feel.  But for bigger decisions, should groups affected always be consulted?  I am in the middle of redesigning the uniforms for my Ultimate Frisbee team at Swarthmore.  There are more than 30 active players, all with different artistic taste and preferences—should I ask every single teammate for their opinion on each design after I make it?  Should I more closely follow the WK model, and consult with the whole team before making any designs?  At the end of the day, would these consultations even impact the final design?

Is this strategy exclusive to socially impactful discourse?  Meaning, for decisions that don’t impact society in the way that IAW did, is this model effective?  For example, when discussing space travel, can we use this system?  Who do we need to consider when making decisions about sending objects into outer space?

## Strategic model and goals of the artist

Even though IAW was technically a meeting between groups of people discussing political policy, it was advertised (and it is considered) an art project.  This wasn’t your run-of-the mill meeting between politicians who think they know what’s best for their community, no—this was an effort to get those politicians to change the way they approach things, and in the eye of the public nonetheless!  Because it was advertised so heavily, because it was so public and stood out so much, a simple discussion between two fairly disparate groups became a work of art.  The stories people told about it, the opinions they expressed, the reports from the media didn’t just contribute to the art, they were the art!  This is why Kester uses it as an example of “dialogical art”—the substance comes from the conversation surrounding it!

IAW had a cacophony to it: the advertising for the piece didn’t necessarily match up with the events of the piece.  For example, the event was publicized and talked about, but the meeting itself was on an isolated boat in the middle of a lake, unreachable by standard means.  It was a meeting about public policy, but many participants were neither experienced politicians nor experienced policy makers.  There’s some disconnect in the piece that can make a viewer confused, even uneasy, and that is what makes IAW a piece of art.  The disconnect is part of what avant-garde art strives for.  Based on Kester’s Conversation Pieces, the avant-garde tries to challenge the audience’s traditional notions of viewership, forcing them to contemplate unusual forms of experience.  Art can be more about the conversation surrounding a piece (what Kester calls “dialogical art”) than the piece itself, and that goes to show with IAW.

While the stated goal of the piece was to intertwine art and politics by including members of a drug-addicted community in discussions about political policy, I believe that WK had some expectations.  Policy was expected to change in considerable favor toward the sex workers, with the moral being that interacting with a community makes you more empathetic toward their hardships.  So did the artist get what they wanted?  Absolutely!  The piece was considered a success by the press, as a daytime shelter aiding sex workers was established in Zurich for six years after the piece.

## Social impact of IAW

The question remains: is this method (making policy alongside people for whom the policy applies) a viable way of approaching discussion?  Has this performance impacted how we can locally and globally change the way we make decisions?  I think concluding that this is a realistic expectation for the contemporary world as a whole is extrapolating.  That being said, I think it’s viable at small scales.  In America, local governments have some considerations for the greater community.  Town meetings give residents the opportunity to voice concerns about government decisions, which in a way is similar to what WK produced in 1994, but for the most part governments generally act on behalf of people without discussing what the people’s interests are.  It’s harder to imagine this working on a large scale.  The bigger a production gets and the more people involved, the more you have to accommodate for everyone’s individual needs.

Going back to the example about designing my team’s uniforms: I was told by a few people who were in my position years ago “you can’t please everyone, so just make a decision and hope for the best.”  This sounds inconsiderate, but in reality that’s what happened.  I proposed a uniform, and almost everyone thought it would be better with a slight change (all of the changes were different, mind you).  If it can’t work for a group of thirty people choosing what shirt to wear, how can it work with a whole local government, or a whole country?  I do think that everyone, no matter what status or position of power, benefits from discussion with people from different backgrounds.  Even though making a decision in this way might not make everyone happy, reaching out and including the people who will be affected by it will help in some way.  In my experience making games, people can offer criticisms and perspectives that you had never even thought of.  Opening up the floor to everyone usually can’t hurt, so even if it doesn’t work out in the end, it seems to be worth a try, which can work outside of policy-making, too (take my board game or team uniform anecdotes, for example)

#@#  Challenging the traditional avant-garde

Just reading this paper, IAW seems more like a political move than an art performance.  I’ve been talking about applying the WK method to political discussion and group decisions on a national and global scale—this sounds like political science, not art history!  But that’s precisely the goal of the avant-garde: challenge the viewer’s notions of art.  Half-public/half-private meetings between politicians and sex workers can be art, a strategic model that can be applied to different scenarios can be art, discussions about meetings and strategic models can be art.  In this way, IAW follows along with the traditional avant-garde framework.  But how does it challenge that same framework?  Even for the avant-garde, the “art” in this performance is particularly abstract.  Private discussions took place over several days, and the audience was just aware that they were happening.  We have no real proof, other than the shelter that popped up afterward, that the participants discussed things civilly, or that they discussed things at all!  The reason this political discussion became art is because emphasis was put on A: how private and isolated the conversations were and B: who was included in the conversations.  The media reacted to how much they weren’t able to see and how strange it was that policy makers and sex workers were uniting to discuss solutions to things like drug addiction and homelessness among the workers.

Conclusion

This performance truly excited me.  I loved how it melded two worlds, artistic and political, together.  How the media paid so much attention to a conversation they couldn’t hear, how the communication model reminded me of my work with board games, how that same model would work or break down on a larger scale.  The event was an experiment of sorts, one whose results can be analyzed and applied to more than just the art world and the political world.  Any organization, any system, and any person can benefit from considering the positions of others, and IAW proves that to some extent.
