---
layout: narrative
title: Are You In or Out? Consciousness-raising strategies in Womanhouse and In Mourning and in Rage
author: Allie
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Historically, socially engaged artworks have employed a variety of strategies to achieve social transformation. To better understand these approaches, one can compare the diverging tactics employed by two 1970s feminist artworks, Womanhouse and In Mourning and In Rage. Womanhouse was a 1972 feminist environmental art installation organized by Judy Chicago and Miriam Shapiro, co-founders of the CalArts Feminist Art Program. A collaborative effort between Chicago, Shapiro, and their art students, Womanhouse aimed to respond to conventional art institutions’ exclusion of women artists by empowering and raising the consciousness of such artists, as well as creating a physical space for women’s societal role to be critiqued and hyperbolized in an exclusively women’s space. In Mourning and in Rage was a public performance art installation organized by Suzanne Lacy in 1977, six months following the artist’s famous series of events, Three Weeks in May, which called attention to the pervasive and ill-addressed sexual violence against women in Los Angeles. In Mourning and in Rage was organized in response to mass media’s erroneous and sensationalized coverage of the Hillside Strangler murders, in which 10 women were found raped and killed. While Womanhouse and In Mourning and in Rage both had the goal of consciousness-raising in the name of broader social transformation, the targets of their consciousness-raising efforts and their strategies for achieving this goal differed. If Womanhouse aimed to raise the consciousness of women artists through the rejection of conventional male-dominated art institutions and the construction of a physical space bracketed for women’s empowerment, In Mourning and in Rage aimed to raise the political consciousness of the general public and governmental institutions by appropriating conventional mass media coverage and bracketing public attention for the issue of sexual violence against women. In other words, Womanhouse aimed to use the transformation of the oppressed group to achieve social change, while In Mourning and in Rage aimed to use the transformation of the oppressor and those who were neutral and/or complicit in the oppressor’s violence to transform society.

Womanhouse and In Mourning and in Rage both employed consciousness-raising efforts to encourage social transformation, but their targets of those efforts differed. When Los Angeles’ major art institutions failed to create space for women artists, Chicago and Shapiro decided to completely abandon the male-dominated art spaces in favor of creating their own. The duo held consciousness-raising groups for women artists to discuss issues pertaining to the collective ‘female experience.’ In these women-only spaces and through these profound conversations, Chicago and Shapiro believed women could overcome their internalized sexism, validate each other’s experiences, and cultivate a greater sense of collective strength and empowerment. These conversations produced the content that would make up the environmental art installation of Womanhouse, an entire building dedicated to physically representing and visualizing the ideas, concerns, and experiences discussed in the consciousness-raising groups. The women worked together to renovate the entire house by hand, using power tools to fix banisters, windows, and walls. Through this brute force physical labor and these deep discussions, the organizers believed that the artists would be able to overcome ‘women’s problems,’ which included traits such as passivity and a general lack of self-confidence. Chicago and Shapiro aimed to transform society by rejecting male-dominated conventional art institutions and raising the women artists’ consciousness of their own power, agency, and creative potential.

Chicago and Shapiro’s focus on transforming the consciousness of the oppressed group contrasts with Lacy’s approach to social transformation, which focused on changing the consciousness and actions of the oppressor, which in this case was the general public and the government. In Mourning and in Rage used the strategy of disseminating alternative narratives about sexual violence against women to challenge the victimizing, erroneous, and sensationalized stories circulated by mass media. Following the disrespectful media coverage of the Hillside Strangler Murders, which framed the murdered women as sexually promiscuous and defenseless victims, Lacy organized a group of women to perform in front of Los Angeles’ City Hall, where they held banners, yelled chants, performed speeches. Nine of the women stood on the steps of City Hall, draped in black cloaks shaped like coffins which made them appear to be seven feet tall. A banner behind them read, “In Memory of Our Sisters, Women Fight Back!” Such a spectacle forced news outlets to take note. Critic Jeff Kelley noted Lacy’s strategic use of messaging and imagery, saying, “the performance was itself a kind of ritualistic press conference designed to capture and fix media attention by anticipating and appealing to its journalistic conventions.” By catering to mass media’s conventions, Lacy was successful in focusing media attention on more empowering and action-oriented framings of the Hillside Strangler murders and actively challenging the problematic and victim-blaming narratives that conventional news outlets were circulating, therefore redirecting the consciousness of the public and the local government. Clearly, Lacy’s strategy for In Mourning and in Rage was more concerned with overhauling the consciousness of the oppressors and those who are complicit in their violence, than with that of the oppressed (though many of her Three Weeks in May events were made to empower survivors of sexual violence).

Feminist artists of the 1970s aimed to transform society using a variety of different consciousness-raising strategies. Through their environmental installation, Womanhouse, Chicago and Shapiro rejected conventional male-dominated art institutions in order to create new ways of producing art for women and by women. By creating a woman-only art space and leading consciousness-raising groups where artists could empower each other, Womanhouse helped to transform the consciousness of women artists. This rejection of conventional structures in order to promote societal transformation contrasts with Lacy’s approach in her performance piece, In Mourning and in Rage. Instead of rejecting conventional mass media structures, Lacy used journalistic conventions to her advantage by organizing a public spectacle that would capture media attention and inject more empowering, alternative narratives about sexual violence against women into mainstream news outlets. As evidenced by Womanhouse and In Mourning and in Rage, multiple strategies for influencing consciousness-raising and social transformation underscored socially-engaged artworks during the 1970s feminist art movement.
