---
layout: narrative
title: Strategy and Identity- On Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women's path to Social Transformation and Transcendence
author: Bria Dinkins
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Womanhouse (1972) and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women (1994) were projects organized on behalf of different female populations, both made to address specific problems and pose solutions to these problems. Womanhouse was a women’s exhibit and art space made in direct response to the exclusive art institution in L.A. and everywhere, while Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women was a kind of experimental performance on a boat in Zurich, which goal was finding policy solutions in order to alleviate the plight of drug addicted women. The strategies enlisted by the artists in the two works in order to achieve social transformation were drastically different in their methods. These methods seen through the creation of identity formation or encouragement for dis-identification, the visions and assignations of spaces and their purposes, the works’ attitudes towards the role of men, and ultimately, the artists’ actual positioning or interpretation of themselves in relation to their project and materials. Many, if not all of these strategies can not be separated from the specific goals the artists and the works had.

Both Woman House and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women used fantasy in their works as a strategy, one as a method for identity formation and the other for dis-identification. Their application of fantasy not only differ, but their executions were crucial for their particular interests. The House’s fantasy was visible. It was a purposeful re-presentation of the oppression of domestic life. But the House was not a haunted house nor a place of fear. It proved to be a place which sounded like laughter and giggling, feet shuffling, doors opening— sounds of exploration, curiosity, conversation, community building and most importantly, it sounded like women. The House was a fun house with an almost warped sense of humor born out of the shared trials and tribulations of “housewifery”, “womanhood”  and its necessary coping and reclamation. Although it is unclear and unlikely if the choosing of the subject matter of fantastical domesticity was strategic at first, the choice became essential in enrapturing the attention of visitors and art critics alike. The fantasy in the art was a form of self-definition, while the unique experience and immersion in the fantasy created by the house became a medium for identity formation.

The Intervention’s use of fantasy was embedded or implicit. Fantasy was a method used to deconstruct uneven planes for the sake of a productive discourse. The “fantasy” was unnamed. Everyday for two weeks, different governmental and medical actors and experts went on boat rides in order to have conversations and express views about the reality this population of women were facing while avoiding public exposure. The carnivalesque nature of the boat conversations was essential for gaining common understanding and in some cases, predicated on the transformation of individuals’ political stances. Carnivalesque or the idea that the people were characters and could change clothes or social roles, was enabled by the actual space itself. The boat assumed this position as a bracketed space of liminitality, a place where the “real” world was just a few hundred feet away off the dock, on the land. This physical liminality created by the separation and purposeful choosing of a “random” or ambiguous location aided in facilitating a fantasy world. The carnivalesque performance was meant to allow people to speak to one another without the socialized enforcement of their positions. On the one hand, this made the intervention fantastical because there was never going to be a natural situation where a conversation like this conversation could take place. It was a state of fantasy because the positions of people were meant to almost fall away; the carnivalesque was a facilitation strategy for the creation of empathy, sanctity, and anonymity. On the other hand, the intervention could not actually be fantasy, because it relied on those very people in the boat and in conversation to leave the space of liminality and remember and make change and then hopefully vote and keep voting in a way that reflected their experience. The House and the Intervention imagined and utilized fantasy in different ways: one for identity formation and then for dis-identification; the vision of their roles as spaces and projects differed as well.

Both works strategized, planned and adjusted what their “after-lives” would be. These aligned with the different assignations and purposes of the spaces and projects. Womanhouse has had a long lifespan and a multitude of identities correlating to and fluid with this lifespan, and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women had a shorter lifespan and the project’s identity was relatively segmented.  If a monument is a structure that is erected to construct a collective memory of an event or person of importance, then Womanhouse, a converted mansion and found space, may fall under the genre of the anti or counter monument since it makes a testament out of the symbol for domesticity and claims control over a narrative either forgotten or purposely delegitimized. The mansion became an art installation, art institution and exhibit and further after its mission evolved, spilled into Womanspace and other realms which deemed it a movement, a network, a locust, a community art and learning space serving women. The Womanspace and the institutions whose existence was predicated on the initial one’s success had multiple and flexible identities all made to strengthen and engage female consciousness, essentialized by the importance placed on female art. The privileging of separatism as a strategy, which in many ways defined the work of this project, pointed to what Lucy Lippard shares in her reflections on the space:
I suspect we’ll need such rooms of our own for some time. The difference between talking to a mixed art-school class and one made up solely of women has to be experienced to be believed, but there sure as hell is a difference in the way women open up, become smart and imaginative and assertive—and better artists” , ending her essay with: “there, everything seems possible—including a non-separitist future”(99-100).

In this way, the House was and is both a reworked version of the problem and a single gesture and solution to the problem, or at least a structure of thought and guidelines for solution-making.

The Intervention could be broken up into two parts. The first part, the boat meetings were in reaction to Zurich’s reduction of social services for drug addicted women who prostituted. The boat meetings were organized to get these decisions reversed and to get political actors to advocate for these women. The boat meetings or the carnivalesque, was the first part, the performance. The manifestation of the solutions, the main one being housing, along with other improvements, was the second part. The controlled distribution of narcotics and representation of women via social workers in court were implemented changes. However, the main difficulty the women were facing was housing. Homeless, with little to no rights, these women could be victimized by their pimps, customers, dealers, police and the larger system (of thought). While homeless shelters were open at night, these women needed shelter for the day. On the boat, actors were informed about the plan and discussed it. Unfortunately, the efforts created by the boat meeting, including the shelter only lasted a handful of years before deteriorating and running out of funding. Overall, the Intervention, unlike the House,  had a short life span and had a more specific and concrete aim which was less fluid and more easily separated into parts. Both of the works deal with domesticity, but differently. While the house was a symbol of oppression and the House and its movement used identity formation as a way of re-appropriating it, showing that women artists deserved space for this, the lack of housing was the problem being solved for in the Intervention. Similarly to what Faith Ringgold wrote about the reasons we need to pay attention to and learn from incarcerated women (105), drug addicted women who prostitute themselves are neglected because they have failed to be good women, wives or mothers. The intervention was to change consciousness surrounding these women and manifest solutions. These women not only needed a space, but they deserved it as a right, not a luxury. The two works’ different strategies and choices in framing, adjusting and continuing goals become very apparent in their comparisons.

While it was antithetical to the identity of the House to prioritize the male gaze and so used separatism as a strategy, the Intervention relied on male presence and strategized the event to include men. The Intervention instead, resisted the public, uncontrolled gaze. The house as a structure, is one of the most responsible for creating the dichotomy between public and private (spaces). It is in the private home where women, their ideas and artistry are isolated from one another and at the same time, despite its female connotation, is the site where patriarchy rules most strictly. This makes the home the perfect place to rebell— for its quality as a place maintained and most known by the woman who is made to run it—and as an already private or isolated space. It is the symbolic reclamation and reappropriation of the household space which denies the ever present, but sometimes invisible male gaze. This symbolism was embodied by the strategy to exercise control over the male gaze through restricting hours of visitation and using the power of separatism at Womanhouse. This was the most essential ingredient in the fight for female artists.

The Intervention was a means to create specific policy change and action. The conversations may have needed men because many, if not most of the people in power with the ability to enact these organizational and economic changes were men. It was these socialized people with the same exposure to patriarchy—the same patriarchy affecting the entire community and which perpetuated the plight of these women—who needed to come together to at least briefly overcome it in order to solidify change. It is unlikely that the funding for the project would have been harnessed without any men being present at the conversation. Because of the goal of the project, the privileged nature of the male voice had to be enlisted, rather than restricted. In the same vain, the carnivalesque boat exercise shielded figures from the public gaze, at least at first, and consequently relieved the participants of pressure. Both House and Intervention used the private, bracketed space and limited particular gazes but for different reasons.

Differently than the applied methods themselves, the strategies embedded in the positioning of themselves as artists (or something/someone else) as well as the unseen art materials used in the two works, were crucial in the two sets of approaches for achieving social transformation. The organizers and founders of Womanhouse were led by figures in the Cal Arts Feminist art program. The women involved in this organization, the creation of the original art as well as the progression of its sister projects and the artists there, had various roles which in totality created a web of community beyond the house and the roots of it, itself. Their materials, in addition to the initial physical art pieces inside the house and artworks displayed later at the “open wall”, were the house, the network of women and funding, and media.

Wochenklausur, a Vienna-based social intervention group positioned themselves as mediators and performers, but they were invited by the Shedhalle art museum in order to imagine a way to respond to the issue. It is their role and identity as non-Swiss social performers and innovators which may have played a part in the project’s relatively short life and definitely in its segmented structure. The potentially forgotten materials the Intervention used was the Wochenklausur themselves, the boat/dock and infrastructure, the shelter and funding to create it, the figures who attended the meetings as well as the strategic disengagement and engagement with the media and through it, the public.
Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women, used different strategies to create physical environments, facilitate a sense of shared feeling and identified or named themselves and their processes in order to achieve their visions of and goals for social transformation. The House’s main goal was to transform female consciousness by providing an alternative world in which women could be artists and women too since this simultaneity proved to be a point of irreconcilable tension pervasive and perpetuated in the art world throughout previous generations. The Intervention’s main goal was to use consciousness raising amongst political actors in order to provide a shelter for women struggling with homelessness due to their situation and profession. Both the works’ strategies correlated with the projects’ goals, different contexts (time and place) and revealed their multifaceted-ness. The comparison of the two reveal the plethora of ways we can transcend in-place structures, stimulate social transformations and through it, design new and better worlds.





### References:

Lucy Lippard, "Household images in art", "The LA Woman's Building", in From the Center. Feminist Essays on Women's Art (Dutton Press: New York, 1976)
Michele Wallace, "For the Women's House: Interview with Faith Ringgold", in C. Morris and R. Hockley (eds.) We Wanted a Revolution. Black Radical Women 1965-85. A Sourcebook (New York City, Durham: Brooklyn Museum, Duke University Press, 2017)
http://www.womanhouse.net/website-mission

http://www.wochenklausur.at/projekt.php?lang=en&id=4
