---
layout: narrative
title: Sisterhood, Womanhouse, and Three Weeks in May- A Critique of the Second Wave of Feminism
author: Diana Martinez
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

'We can be sisters united by shared interests and beliefs, united in our appreciation for diversity, united in our struggle to end sexist oppression, united in political solidarity'Bell Hook, 41.

Feminist artists reclaimed their stories through creative installations during the 1970s. In 1971, Professors Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro along with their students from the California Institute of the Arts came together to reimagine a dilapidated 17-room mansion in Los Angeles, California. After spending two months rebuilding the infrastructure, the cohort gave life to a collaborative and educational art project known as Womanhouse. This art installation deconstructed gender roles through curated art installations that centered domestic imagery. Similarly, Suzanne Lacy added to the feminist discourse of the decade by creating Three Weeks in May about six years after Womanhouse was built. Three Weeks in May was a three-week long art performance series at the Los Angeles City Mall and the Studio Watts Workshop that recentered the testimonies of survivors of sexual violence in feminist conversations and public memory. Together, Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May reflect the successes and limits of social change through the arts during the second wave of feminism.

This paper will analyze the social impact of Woman House and Three Weeks in May based on the theoretical merits outlined in Bell Hook's 1986 essay, 'Sisterhood: Political Solidarity Between Women.' Hooks wrote this essay in the early transition phase between the second wave and third wave of feminism. The third wave emerged from the frustration that women of color and working-class women felt with the second wave: They critiqued the second wave for its narrow focus on the experiences of white middle-class women. Hooks echoes this sentiment through her beautifully written essay and proposes embracing sisterhood, an intersectional feminist liberation theory rooted in collective resistance, anti-racism, anti-classism, and anti-sexism. According to Hooks, sisterhood is the ability for women to build solidarity among themselves based on their 'shared strengths and resource.' (Hooks, 30) Letting go of the 'victim narrative' allows women, specifically white bourgeoisie women, to do the 'dirty work' of redistributing their power and unlearning racism, sexism, and classism. (Hooks, 31) In elevating the feminist political consciousness through an intersectional framework, Hooks argues that women will be able to truly fight for a liberation that emancipates all women of patriarchal oppression.

Rooted in Hooks' idea of sisterhood, this paper posits that meaningful social impact in feminist discourses is defined as a process of change that unites women based on their collective strengths and is intentionally inclusive of all identities. Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May were successful to the degree that they united women based on their desire to reclaim their narratives. Women were in control of their stories and bodies. Nonetheless, there was a limited dialogue on race and class which hindered the projects from fully embracing the experiences of all women. Though both projects had the potential to involve more women through their application of social practice art strategies, their projects fell short of Hooks' call for an intersectional feminist political consciousness.

Womanhouse cultivated a space for college-educated women to collectively resist against conforming to gender expectations. The 17-room art installation was deemed revolutionary for its avant-garde artistic approach and emphasis on creating art for women by women. The artists and the viewers reclaimed and challenged house-making traditions with the intention of sedimenting control over their lives through phantasmagoric artistic installations. In 'Womanhouse Original Catalog Essay,' Chicago and Schapiro define Womanhouse as a 'repository of the daydreams women have as they wash, bake, cook, sew, clean and iron their lives away.' (Chicago and Schapiro, 4) The artists of Womanhouse used domestic imagery to cultivate strong bonds rooted in their frustration with patriarchal expectations. The artist-viewer connections spoke to their new-found agency which sought to reinvision a world without the male gaze. In other words, Womanhouse was a physical manifestation of the 'dreams and fantasies [women] envisioned for what would be an exclusively female environment.' (Chicago and Schapiro, 2) The women involved in creating this interactive art gallery were adamant about creating a space for women to bond over their agency. Thus, this element of Womanhouse aligns with Hooks' understanding of sisterhood. The women involved refused to relate over a shared victimhood, but instead reclaimed household traditions to deconstruct it according to their visions of women empowerment. In other words, Womanhouse was as a physical manifestation of the young artists' commitment to repurpose their energy with the ends of positing a feminist paradigm of being and relating to the world.

Lacy followed in the tradition of Womanhouse by creating Three Weeks in May, a performance art series that framed the testimonies of survivors of sexual violence as narratives of survivorship and strength. Labowitz, one of the installation's collaborators, described that Lacy's artistic team strove to juxtapose the media's portrayal of the women as 'helpless victims' with an empowering depiction of the women as 'strong survivors.' (Nancy Princenthal, 8) Lacy and her team created a series of educational demonstrations, workshops, performances, and rituals to offer a space founded on collective strength. Some of the art performances were intended to be experienced by the larger public while others were intended to create a safe space only for survivors. The experiences of survivors of sexual assault are often defined by their inability to consent and claim ownership of their bodies. Thus, it is critical to frame their experiences as one of survivorship because it allows them to reclaim control over their body and soul. Victimhood narratives can be paralyzing because they further strip survivors of the agency they first lost during their traumatic sexual assault incident. Lacy's focus on collective strength assists survivors in their healing process. This framework also facilitates a sisterhood where women 'strengthen and affirm one another' through their shared experiences of empowerment. (Hooks, 31)

Furthermore, Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May fail to make space for the experiences of non-white middle-class women, which is a key part of Hook's definition of sisterhood. Hooks claims that 'rather than pretend union, [women] should acknowledge that [they] are divided and must develop strategies to overcome fears, prejudices, resentments, competitiveness, etc.' (Hooks, 40) It is important to recognize differences in order to unlearn personal biases and address the various needs of diverse women. Hooks' point is not fully developed in Womanhouse or Three Weeks in May. Feminist activist and art critic Lucy Lippard described Womanhouse as 'primarily a middle-class institution.' (Lucy Lippard, 97) Her characterization was a fair assessment given most of the artists involved in the process were white college-educated, middle-class women. Similar to Womanhouse, Lacy's art installation lacked an intersectional framework. While the performance pieces hoped to mobilize the public by centering sexual assault survivor testimonials, it did not hold specific conversations on how race, sexuality, and class affect the experiences of survivors.

Nonetheless, it is important to recognize that the application of social practice art strategies in Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May reflect an attempt to form a mass-based woman coalition. Social practice art is defined as an artistic work that is created through dialogue and social interactions. Art critic Nancy Princenthal sediments this definition by emphasizing the role of social interactions as a medium. This artistic approach can be seen in the way that Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May collaborated with local community organizations for their installations. In doing so, Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May expanded the scope of their audience. Womanhouse collaborated with about twelve local Los Angeles organizations including the Los Angeles chapter of NOW, the Women's Liberation Union, and the Studio Watts Workshop. (Lucy Lippard, 97) Bridging the work of Womanhouse with local organizations resembled an effort to explore 'ways to open [Womanhouse] to more minority participation'' (Lucy Lippard, 97)

Lacy reached an even broader audience by collaborating with over thirty city and community-led organizations in Los Angeles. Lacy identified four 'major audience-groupings' that would collaborate on her piece. These 'constituencies' comprised of local government officials, feminist activists, women artists, and media outlets. (Nancy Princenthal, 5) In bringing these together, Lacy invited a wide variety of women to partake in her three-week long installation. However, the constituencies the Lacy brings in ultimately reflect a lack of racial awareness. The Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) is one of organizations present in Three Weeks in May. The LAPD often hyperpolicied black and brown folk and had a record of embedded racism in its structure. In 'How Suzanna Lacy's Feminist Work About Sexual Assault in the 1970s Created a New Art Form,' Princenthal described the LAPD as 'notorious for racism.' (Nancy Princenthal, 7) A degree of critical racial awareness would have perhaps stopped Lacy from inviting a hostile and violent law enforcement agency to partake in an art installation aimed to empower survivors, an identity that's also shared by women of color.

Overall, the limited social impacts of Womanhouse and Three Weeks in May broadly reflect the shortcomings of the second wave of feminism. Hooks' interpretation of sisterhood is critical to use when one analyzes the effects of feminist art pieces because it provides an intersectional framework. Feminist liberation is not liberation if only some women are emancipated. Feminist liberation calls for a redistribution of power that decenters the experience of white bourgeoise women and advocates for the unlearning of racist, sexist, and classist paradigms. It is a difficult process that requires women to look within. Women must proactively work to deconstruct the white bourgeoise heteronormative male gaze to emancipate women from patriarchal oppression. Moving forward, Womanhouse, Three Weeks in May, and other feminist art pieces must intentionally push themselves to build solidarity with all women in order to reimagine what freedom looks like for all.
