---
layout: narrative
title: Inward and Outward- Consciousness-raising in Feminist Art
author: Eva Baron
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Reimagining traditional understandings of the space women occupy throughout the United States, feminist art in the 1970s articulated frustration, solidarity, evoked raw emotions that, as many feminist artists hoped, inspired consciousness-raising. An attempt to “concretize the fantasies and oppressions of women’s experience,” as Lucy Lippard writes, Woman House was established in 1971, consisting of rooms curated by various feminist artists (57). The Kitchen, an imitation of a domestic space by Robin Weltsch, basks in a soft, fleshy glow, with all objects contained within it painted a pinkish orange. Rather than distancing itself from its audience, The Kitchen expresses a unique intimacy through its intentional monochrome palette, one that fundamentally absorbs viewers into its composition. In Mourning and in Rage, a 1977 performance by Suzanne Lacy, departs from interiority and instead projects itself outward, exploiting the media and sensationalism in order to reach as wide an audience as possible. These disparate approaches to feminist art, however, both seek to achieve similar goals, hoping to instill a radical awakening within the audience that ultimately catalyzes social change.

Creating an environment that pulls inward, almost as though it is a center of gravity, Weltsch focuses on a deeply interior experience of feminism, urging identification with domestic claustrophobia. Choking on an almost ghostly pink, The Kitchen invites its audience into its flesh, into a space that lacks anything beyond its own monochromaticity. Objects familiar to the kitchen space—such as pots, pans, toasters, utensils, and plates—litter the room, all drenched in the same pink that coats The Kitchen’s walls and cupboards. Reiterating notions of domesticity through recognizeable visual cues, Weltsch dissects a feminist concern that remains largely interior: the woman’s position in the home. While interiority is certainly inherent to The Kitchen due to its subject matter, the physical space itself similarly absorbs its audience, desperately yet subtly pulling viewers inwards. Described by Weltsch herself in a short poem, the “soft skin of a kitchen pink” resembles flesh, resembles that which resides beneath and within us. Rather than maintaining a comfortable and perhaps expected distance from its audience, The Kitchen forces an uncanny neutralization of all subjects that enter its monochrome walls. The fleshy palette of the space thus inspires an intense identification, dissolving boundaries between kitchen, kitchen objects, and the viewer—everything becomes “all pink skinned,” as Weltsch continues in her poem. As flesh dilutes into Weltsch’s generalized and skintight domesticity, the “intimacy of familiar things…give[s] way to suffocation” (Lippard 58). What once masquaraded as a domestic comfort—the kitchen as well as its objects—collapses into claustrophobia, one that many feminist critics often attribute to compulsive domesticity. Echoing these concerns, Weltsch intentionally pulls her audience inward in order to mimic claustrophobia, an almost inseparable, fleshy connection to domesticity. Engaging its audience by way of its uncanny interiority, The Kitchen absorbs, dillutes, forces identification with its walls.

In comparison to The Kitchen, Lacy’s In Mourning and in Rage stretched outward, provoking the public as well as the media through a sensational performativity. A “dramatic memorial” in honor of the Hillside Strangler victims, In Mourning and in Rage intricately layered theatrics that palpably “capture[d] and fix[ed] media attention” (Princenthal). After escorting a hearse filled with nine performers—all of whom appeared to be “seven feet tall” due to their “headpieces roughly shaped like coffins”—70 performers gathered on the steps of the City Hall in LA, and, one at a time, delivered statements in memory of the “10 women who had been raped and strangled” (Princenthal). Choreographing the “larger-than-life actors,” the “anger-fueled sound bites,” and the “clear symbolism of the funeral cortege” into a rousing performance, Lacy problematized the role of the media in consciousness-raising (Princenthal). Rather than resigning to the “grotesque distort[ion]” of the Hillside Strangler murders by the press, In Mourning and in Rage instead appropriated it, molded “strong survivors” out of the media’s “helpless victims,” as Lacy’s coworker Leslie Labowitz describes. The performance thus functioned as a “kind of ritualistic press conference,” seeking to replace or rewrite the dominant narrative within mass media (Princenthal). While In Mourning and in Rage troubled the “distortion” of the Hillside Strangler murders, the performance simultaneously redefined art’s relationship to the media and its audience. Creating a calculated image designed to “carry a clear meaning via mass media,” Lacy actively anticipated and appealed to “journalistic conventions,” composing striking shots meant to “fit in the horizontal frame of the camera” (Princenthal). The impact of the piece, however, grew as “follow-up discussions with politicians,” all of which “repeated and consolidated the performance’s themes,” received media attention (Princenthal). Expanding outward, reaching a wide audience as a result of Lacy’s exploitation of the media, In Mourning and in Rage compounded motivations to disseminate, to engage thousands in the performance’s message. Horizontal outreach, as filtered through the lens of the media’s camera, defined Lacy’s In Mourning and in Rage, emphasizing wide participation rather than deeply intimate absorption.

Both Weltsch’s and Lacy’s approaches to feminist art, however, remain significant, inspiring various forms of social change by way of their disruptive qualities. Evoking discomfort in its audience, Weltsch’s The Kitchen articulates consciousness similarly to Graciela Carnevale’s 1968 Confinement Action. The Kitchen’s domestic claustrophobia—as imposed by absorbing viewers into the flesh of its walls—functions, in many ways, as a form of cognitive dissonance. This dissonance, as in Confinement Action, moves inwardly, mandates reflection and, ideally, corresponding social action within the audience. Despite being facially passive, The Kitchen’s interiority operates much like “exemplary violence,” sliding into the consciousness of its viewer with simultaneous force and subtlety. Rupturing normative understandings of domesticity, The Kitchen’s inward pull does not mitigate its potential for reflection or social change; instead, it encourages a subsequent contemplation following discomfort, fluidly and intimately carving open dialogue. Lacy’s In Mourning and in Grief, though, proves more extroverted, inflected outwardly toward a myriad of media outlets, audiences, and Californian institutions, such as the City Council and the LAPD. While the composition of the performance itself provoked both the press and the public, In Mourning and in Grief disrupted expectations due to its sheer scale, reaching prominence within the LA art community and beyond it. In this sense, Lacy achieved social change through exteriority and outreach, operating almost as an agitator as she actively disseminated critical feminist insight into the public sphere. Regardless of the disparities between The Kitchen and In Mourning and in Grief, both works prove crucial to the feminist art movement, urging social change whether it be through inward reflection or outward participation.

An expression of political activism, empowerment, and subversive criticism, feminist art in the 1970s incorporated a diverse range of strategies and practices. Probing the interior space that domesticity often occupies, Weltsch’s The Kitchen proved to be an integral room to Woman House, absorbing the viewer into its fleshy walls. A piece focused on pulling inward, on dissolving the audience into an ambiguous and claustrophobic domestic environment, The Kitchen raises consciousness by way of invoking cognitive dissonance, one that parallels Carnevale’s “exemplary violence.” Far more outward in comparison, Lacy’s In Mourning and in Grief manipulated sensationalist composition and imagery through performance in order to garner media attention, to expand audience outreach. Rather than mandating a reflection that is more so intimate (similar to The Kitchen), the performance instead focused on dissemination, on provoking reactions through the “larger-than-life” physicality of the work itself. In this way, Lacy largely functioned as an agitator, someone who explicitly and intentionally challenged dominant narratives not only present in the mass media, but also in the ruling ideology of American patriarchal institutions at the time. While these pieces retain unique and distinct methodologies—one pulling the audience inward and the other expanding widely outward—both seek to raise consciousness, to solicit understanding and empathy for the feminist cause through a dialogical approach.




### Works Cited

Lippard, Lucy R. From the Center: Feminist Essays on Women's Art. Dutton, 1990.

Princenthal, Nancy. “How Suzanne Lacy’s Feminist Work About Sexual Assault in the 1970s 
Created a New Art Form.” ARTnews, 17 Oct. 2019, 
http://www.artnews.com/2019/10/17/suzanne-lacy-social-practice-nancy-princenthal/.

“Works.” WOMAN HOUSE, http://www.womanhouse.net/works.
