---
layout: narrative
title: Bloc 3 Response
author: Isabella Fiorante
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

The students of the California Institute of Arts and the art collective Wochenklauser both offer interesting approaches on how to achieve social transformation through their works Womanhouse and Shelter for Drug-Addicted Women, respectively. While Womanhouse’s social change exists in the emotional impact it had on women, Shelter for Drug-Addicted Women’s impact lies in the construction of a boarding house and safe space for women in need.

Womanhouse was a 1971 art project by feminist professors Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro and their students at the California Institute of the Arts. It involved the renovation of a dilapidated mansion in Los Angeles. Each of the seventeen rooms and the garden space outdoors was redecorated to reflect or explore some aspect of the female experience; there was a dollhouse room, a menstruation bathroom, a bridal staircase, a pink kitchen with egg and breast decor and a crochet room, amongst others.

Womanhouse, when given the context of the art scene in the 1970s, can only be interpreted as revolutionary. Throughout the decades preceding the creation of Womanhouse, Pop Art had become the latest trend on the art scene and this movement allowed men to taken hold of the feminine domain, the household, and claimed it as their own for their art. Pop Art allowed men to turn food and cleaning supplies, ironing boards and appliances into art for their own personal gain. Womanhouse is a revolutionary response to this theft by taking the home, a traditionally female realm, and turns it into a gallery space, which at the time was mostly a man’s domain. Each room focuses on embracing, rejecting or subverting what is typically considered female and the house, when considered as a whole, reflects the complicated and nuanced female experience. It turns mundane female spaces like the kitchen and exaggerates its femininity by adding breasts and eggs to the point of ridiculousness. With each room there is a sense of catharsis in some way. Either through exaggeration and comedic relief or through the embracing of the harder parts of being female, like a bathroom bathed in red paint to emulate menstruation blood and then decorated with restrictive feminine undergarments. Womanhouse is a reclamation of the mundanity of female existence from pop art’s cannibalism.

Beyond the work actually presented in the space, the mere existence of a space like Womanhouse was revolutionary for female artists in the 1970s, who were underrepresented in the art world (as they still are today). As Lucy Lippard points out in her essay The LA Women’s Building, the statistics about women in the art world, particularly female artists in Los Angeles, are damaging: at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, less than one percent of all work on display at the time was created by women, only twenty-nine of seven hundred and thirteen artists in group shows had been women and over the course of ten years, only one, one-artist show out of fifty-three at the museum was by a woman. Given this context, one can understand that to have an entire house, 17 rooms plus garden space, devoted to showcasing art by women was important at the time. Furthermore, women had executed the project from start to finish, from planning the exhibition and locating a house to refurbishing the house and installing their exhibition.

Womanhouse is not without its faults, it leaves many of the spaces open to interpretation, which can lessen the social impact of a work. If one approaches Womanhouse through an anti-feminist lens, some rooms could be interpreted as reinforcing female stereotypes and mocking the female experience. While this conclusion seems unlikely, they did open the space to men (and close-minded women) who could’ve come away with a different experience. Furthermore, it failed to include women of color in its production, and therefore represents a narrower slice of female existence as an important perspective has been left out.

By contrast, Austrian arts collective Wochenklauser brought together several different groups of journalists, politicians, sex workers and social activists in Zurch on three hour long boat cruises on Lake Zurich. The group was given one task: have a conversation about the difficult situation that many drug-addicted prostitutes were facing on the streets of Zurich at the time. Many prostitutes were homeless and were often harassed by the police and their clients. Furthermore, they were heavily stigmatized by Swiss society, making conversations about aid and political change incredibly difficult. At the conclusion of these boat cruises, the participants were able to reach a consensus on a modest solution to the problem at hand. They agreed upon the creation of a boarding house in which sex workers could have a safe place to sleep and access to needed services.

As I reflected on in my first response paper, the execution and process of Wochenklauser’s work highlights their strategic model for enacting social change. There are two key aspects of the work that call attention to the care and attention Wochenklauser employed in order to have some sort of an impact. Firstly, the project seeks to unite people that are affected by the problem with those who have power and stand to generate change. Secondly, the work sought to create the ideal situation in which a consensus could be reached. It operated on neutralized ground (or in this case, neutralized water) and gathered participants in a space to which all parties had more or less equal claim. Moreover, this neutralized space saved participants from media scrutiny and allowed them the freedom to relinquish their societal roles, which increases the chances of actually shifting a participant’s perspective and facilitating real empathy between participants. Wochenklauser employed a dialogical model in order to achieve concrete, if modest, political and social change.

Both works are fundamentally similar in the sense that they attempt to bring about large-scale change through the concentrated efforts of a few individuals. For Womanhouse this was the efforts of the students and their professors to create a space by and for women that would have a positive impact for female artists by breaking down barriers that enforce what women can and can’t do and by dedicating a space specifically for women to think about, analyze and create art. For Wochenklauser, this was the efforts of the smaller groups of sex workers, journalists, lawmakers and social activists to create change for the marginalized sex workers on the streets of Zurich. Their approaches differ in that Wochenklauser’s work followed a dialogical model that focused on policy implementation, while Womanhouse focused on an emotional change, both for those that directly participated in the creation of Womanhouse and for those who were able to see it and/or to take part in the meetings that took place in the space.

Though it might be an obvious or logical conclusion, I’m reluctant to say that Womanhouse had less of an impact than Wochenklauser’s efforts. It most definitely had less of a measurable impact, one that was focused on empowerment and engagement and less on a direct policy change or concrete solution to a problem. The fact that it was women who physically worked on Womanhouse meant that these students had to fulfill traditionally male roles in construction. In a personal account written by the professors behind Womanhouse, many of the students didn’t think they could or should be working in construction and the existence of Womanhouse proved that the project broke at least one barrier for these students. Furthermore, it is fair to assume that the existence of an all-female space dedicated to female art, at a time when women were marginalized in the art community would have had an inspiring and uplifting impact on some artists at the time.

In conclusion, both Wochenklauser’s Shelter for Drug-Addicted Women and the students of Womanhouse offer interesting and diverse approaches on how to generate social change through the creation and designation of certain spaces. It is difficult to assign value as to which methodology is more or less effective. Both works focus on uplifting unheard voices and designating spaces for those in need, but differ in terms of the actual social change that is generated. For Womanhouse, change is sought through uplifting emotions and redefining what is viewed as female while for Shelter for Drug-Addicted Women, change is generated through conversation facilitation.
