---
layout: narrative
title: Recontextualizing space- Womanhouse and Accion del Encierro
author: Jaimie Lopez
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---      

Graciela Carnevale, an Argentine artist, once said that 'only the artist can grasp the interconnected totality of violence within modern society'(The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part II: Agonism and the Taming of Dissent, Grant Kester, 3).  In her piece Accion del Encierro, we can see how the artist can turn the violence of one space into liberation, creating a new space entirely.  In this essay, I will argue that in many instances, socially engaged artists from different genres of art actively work to change the way spaces are defined to question and challenge the audience and the artist.  Both Accion del Encierro by Graciela Carnevale, and the Womanhouse project aim to challenge oppressive meanings of a space in order to convey individual experience and call for change.  

The process of creating Womenhouse was focused on the creation of the home, which is a traditionally gendered space, by women.  To begin the project, women were sent out in groups to search for a house for the project, allowing women to choose their home, which historically was not a choice that was afforded to them.  The house that was chosen for the project required heavy renovations before they were able to create exhibits within the rooms.  The leaders of the Feminist Art Program at the California School of Art knew that these women were not accustomed to the heavy labor associated with the construction of a house: instead, they renovated a house without the help of any men.  By renewing the house without the presence of men, this created a healing space in which women were allowed to create without the presence or judgement of men.  Much of this project was focused on the creative freedom of women within the art-making process.  When the house was fully renovated, it was then that the creation of the exhibits were allowed to happen.  The leaders hosted consciousness-raising sessions on many different topics, such as the kitchen and gender conditioning, and allowed women to collaborate and to create exhibits.  While some of these exhibits were collaborative, many of them were solo projects, detailing the experiences of these individual women within a house.  Womanhouse challenged all people to consider the experiences of women within the home to later Drawing on experiences with age, craft, and gendered expectations, Womanhouse gave women the tools to define this heavily gendered space for themselves.        

As much as Womanhouse tried to aid women in redefining the home, we can see a lack of discussion on race within the exhibits in the piece, making the message inaccessible to certain groups of women.  As we read in the bell hooks' Sisterhood: Political Solidarity Between Women, white feminists at the time neglected their role in perpetuating racism and discounting the role that race plays in gender oppression.  In Womanhouse, the creators were all straight, cisgender, white women, which may explain the lack of discussion on race throughout the exhibits: they may not have been thinking about race, or they had believed that their experiences as women would unite them together.  However, as bell hooks addresses, white feminist need to actively address their own racism in order to creating a lasting change within the feminist movement.	In Accion del Encierro, Graciela Carnevale works to empower the Argentinian public into understanding their role in politics at the time, and advocating for revolution through violence.  For her exhibit, Carnevale had plastered the inside windows of the exhibit with advertisement posters, and then allowed a group of people in.  She locked the door behind them without any instruction.  Creating her own performance piece, she watched from afar, as the participants inside the gallery tore down the posters, and looked through the glass exterior of the exhibit space out into the street.  Carnevale's intention for the piece was for the group to understand that they were trapped, and to understand that the only way to enact change is to break out of the walls imposed by the oppressive dictatorship by literally breaking from the glass in which Carnevale has enclosed them in.  By seeing another participant in the group break the glass, the audience will be motivated by their 'exemplary violence' and understand their ability to create change.  She had changed the meaning of the gallery into a locus for political action.  Carnevale requires the participants to convert the violence perpetrated by the state into revolutionary violence.

Both projects work to take previously oppressive spaces into catalysts for change.  Womanhouse works to reclaim the house for a healing artistic purpose.  As these women worked to reconstruct their own home, making it a space away from men and the male gaze, and then used it to explain their traumas that stem from gender oppression.  This is expressed by the creation of art in the absence of men, and creating a womens-only day for the opening of the exhibit.  The purpose of sharing the art is to exemplify a woman's ability to make art, and to share their experiences with other people.  Rooms such as 'The Nursery', which is a to-scale recreation which is decorated 'from the viewpoint of a woman considering what the ideal living space might be for a child' according to the artist, highlight a gendered experience from infancy to adulthood.  'Crocheted Environment' by Faith Wilding takes crochet, an art form that is often discredited due to its association with women, and lines it against a painted black wall like decoration to create a haunting image of home.  'Personal Space' works to disrupt the expectations of housework that are placed onto women through a messy room, meant to represent the secret places everyone, but especially women, keeps inside of themselves.  Similarly, Accion del Encierro aims to reclaim the agency of the people through a confined space that symbolizes oppression, branding it as a space for political action and consciousness raising.  By changing the meaning of the space, both projects show that the meaning of a space can be changed for the better.	Despite working within different genres, such as the avant-garde and feminist art, both projects aim to rework gendered and political understandings of space in order to spark a debate.  Both projects work to destabilize systems of violence, and try to make them accessible to the public.  Though Womanhouse emphasizes healing and Accion del Encierro emphasizes revolutionary violence, both are forms of resistance.  Both aim to free people, or women and the Argentinian public, from oppressive system that continue their subjugation.  Both work by providing examples of revolutionary acts, such as breaking the glass or a woman working as a conceptual artist.  Revolutionary art changes space, and the way it is used to empower people.  
