---
layout: narrative
title: Feminist Art and Social Change- Comparing Womanhouse and ‘For the Women’s House’
author: Kaavya Arakoni
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Feminist art is inherently political, and most often it is directly aiming to achieve social transformation. Womanhouse was a collaborative environmental art installation created in 1972 by several women from the California Institute of the Arts, and aimed to showcase a fantastical take on a shared female space of dreams, fantasies, and hopes. ‘For the Women’s House’ was a mural created in 1972 by Faith Ringgold for the Women’s House of Detention, and it showed women in different situations defying traditional gender roles and norms. In this essay, I will discuss the intention behind these two artworks as forms for social change, as well as the role of institutional power in achieving said social change. I will go on to discuss the strategies that both artworks use that make them revolutionary such as their intended audience– in both cases it is women. Finally, I will discuss the differences in their approach to creating a space for ‘sisterhood’ and the importance of race in discussing feminism and feminist art.

First, it is important to examine the motivation behind these artworks because doing so will allow for a more thorough analysis of the strategies for social transformation undertaken by the multiple artists of Womanhouse and Faith Ringgold. Womanhouse is more explicitly aiming for social transformation, and is political in a way that ‘For the Women’s House’ was not intended to be. Womanhouse was a revolutionary artwork in 1972, not only for its artistic form as a house representing the shared labor of several female artists, but also as a fantastical installation placing specific value on domestic imagery. ‘For the Women’s House’ was a mural that was primarily for the women in prison who have been “rejected by society” (Wallace, 113). The mural aimed to depict women in roles and positions that were not traditionally seen in society at the time so as to serve as a representation of the wishes of the women in the prison – “justice, freedom, … [and] rehabilitation of all prisoners” (Wallace, 105). Ringgold expressed that had the mural been for another purpose, she might have made it more political. Even so, the mural is still political because it is a feminist artwork. The defiant and clear message that Ringgold portrays in her work is inherently political because it dares to reimagine an equal society with women assuming roles that they do not even to this day.

The varying amounts of power that the artists of Womanhouse and Faith Ringgold have also allow their artworks to be recognized and consumer by audiences larger than were intended. Womanhouse was made by students of the California Institute of the Arts and the project was led by Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro who founded the Feminist Arts Program at the institute. There was certainly some institutional power involved in the making of Womanhouse given the scale of the project, and this power allowed Womanhouse to be positioned in such a way as to bring revolutionary change. They were able to acquire the house and redesign it as they wished and were able to publicize the event widely enough so as to bring people who traveled to view the installation. This power is by no means a negative because it allowed for the attention the artwork needed in order to take meaningful steps towards social transformation. Ringgold won an award from the Creative Artists Public Service Program (CAPS) and used the award money to create the mural ‘For the Women’s House.’ She faced issues with “bureaucracy and institutional standoffishness” but was able to eventually accomplish creating the mural for the women’s prison (Wallace, 104). The institutional power that both sets of artists possessed allowed them to organize their projects and disseminate their views on the female experience and gender roles in order to achieve social transformation.

A big aspect of the strategy used by the artists of Womanhouse and Faith Ringgold was the exclusion of men in their narrative. In her essay, Lucy Lippard discusses the effect of an entirely female work space on the creativity and comfort felt by the women artists. The artists of Womanhouse created an environmental art installation that was exclusively by women for women, which led to a “difference in the way women [opened] up, [and were] imaginative and assertive” (Lippard, 100). The artists only allowed men in the house on some open house days and therefore for the most part the art was not interfered with by the male gaze. This was a crucial part of the strategy for social transformation, a space in which men, instead of women, were facing different rules and expectations. In her mural, Ringgold also made a specific choice to not include men, and a choice to create the mural for the women’s prison and not the men’s. She specifically draws attention to the fact that the rehabilitation processes are different for women, “The stigma attached…  for a woman is a very threatening one because of the idea of how dare her not be a good wife and mother” (Wallace, 105). Ringgold draws attention to this stark difference in treatment of ex-convicts by gender and asserts a need for more focus on this and many other stereotypes of women that she questions in her artwork.

One of the main differences between the message of transformation for Womanhouse and ‘For the Women’s House’ is the representation of the female experience and the inclusion of race. Womanhouse was more focused on “[concretizing] the fantasies and oppressions of women's experience” (Lippard, 57). In the video that shows viewers interacting with the installations, the female viewers are seen laughing and there is a sense of ownership and familiarity that the women are able to have in the space that Womanhouse has created. However, Womanhouse is more about a ‘universal’ experience of being a woman, which womanhood is not. There is no acknowledgment of race dynamics or any attempted “confrontation of racism” and the deep ties the issue has to feminism (hooks, 27). In contrast, ‘For the Women’s House’ showcases representation and does not claim any universal experience, rather it simply shows women from different backgrounds and races defying gender roles and establishes a more inclusive idea of “sisterhood” that does not “dismiss race” (hooks, 34).

Womanhouse and ‘For the Women’s House’ are both socially transformative artworks in their own right and aimed to re-examine the female experience and the possibility of a more equal future. Although their intentions might seem slightly different, they were both political artworks that were able to organize and position themselves so as to achieve change through institutional power. The exclusion of the male gaze and the male narrative from both artworks make them revolutionary, although Womanhouse had a more universal female narrative to it and could have benefitted from including the work of artists of color in order to have a more nuanced representation of feminist art.
