---
layout: narrative
title: Womanhouse and House
author: Kieran Huang
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro's Womanhouse (1972) and Rachel Whiteread's House (1993) share similarities in their principalities of having their art exist as monuments that were demolished within a few months, and specifically buildings, however, their approaches and intentions differ greatly. House was a concrete cast of a building in Bow, one of the poorest neighborhoods of London, that was planned for demolition. Womanhouse was a 17 room house open and exclusive to women. The house was decorated with art by local artists and students. When considering the effect that both pieces had on disrupting space, Womanhouse participates in a dialogical framework, while House fails to engage its audience in the same way due to its opaqueness.

So, what elements of monuments tie these together. I think it is important to view monuments in regards to space transformation and disruption. In considering space transformation, the art considers both it was and what it becomes. House makes through concrete cast, the internal and domestic architecture of what used to be someone's home. It only exists in reference to the original home, and by disrupting the space it becomes analogous to the destruction of space and eviction going on throughout Bow and nationally (even internationally). Womanhouse maintains the same architectural structure of the house that already exists. It is by transforming the interior and domestic space that Womanhouse is able to redress discussions of women's roles in domestic settings. Lucy R. Lippard discusses Womanhouse in the context of women being able to claim discussions of domestic life through art. Lippard writes that Womanhouse 'was an attempt to concretize the fantasies and oppressions of women's experiences' (Lippard, 47). The taking of space of memorials is also meant to be noticable, they are large objects and cannot be ignored by passers by. This control of public space makes it crucial that the work engage thoughtfully with the community that it takes place in, so that it does not abuse or misuse its power.

I think it is essential to consider in both pieces, the aspect of locality and community. House is arguably more specific to its community, as the neighborhood that the house is in defines its meaning, specifically that of class awareness and criticism of gentrification. Womanhouse didn't need to be in that specific neighborhood or building to exist. However, when looking at a more personal level, the community around House did not engage with it, instead it was more discussed and acclaimed around the elite art institutions. The concepts of class disparities were not necessarily specific to Bow, and the piece could have been done elsewhere. In contrast, the art Womanhouse lies in its collaborative process among local artists and students. It is defined through local engagement rather than by circumstance. In this way Womanhouse participates in form of community organizing that House wholly lacks.

The collaborative nature and participation of Womanhouse allows it to be considered under Grant Kester's framework of dialogical art. Through this lens we can view Womanhouse's message as being experiential. It works in this method in two different ways: the collaborative nature of the exhibitions' creations, and its accessibility and viewership from the public. It was informed and created based on the experiences of daily domestic life for women. Because of this the power of the artist is expanded to the participants and creates an awareness of a collective consciousness and identity. This is essential to bell hooks's view of 'sisterhood', in creating critical spaces for solidarity between women and deconstructing hegemonic structures within fenminist groups. Lippard talks similarly about the necessity of women exclusive art spaces, in the different ways that women 'open up, become smart and imaginative and assertive -- and better artists' (Lippard, 100). Within Kester's Dialogical framework, the exclusivity of the space can be compared to that of Wochenklausur, in which the separation of space to regular social norms creates a less performative and more genuine and persuasive experience. Contrastly, Kester thinks that House was not effective in its persuasion. Within it, House has the avant-garde contradiction of disrupting conventional and dominant ideologies and language while simultaneously being inaccessible in understanding to the majority of the public. In its incomprehensibility, House acts more like an art object, separate from any engaged dialectics.

One key aspect in the analysis on Kester's framework of dialogical art is evaluating art based on its social and political effects. While, on a larger social, cultural, and political it is near impossible to determine each of the artwork's indirect effect on social change, we can get a sense based on where they fit in a conceptual lineage. As mentioned, the collaborative nature of Womanhouse directly engages with people in a way that House does not. It directly offers a space of solidarity, greater freedom of expression, and emotional healing. House, directly benefits noone, except its creator. While Womanhouse's direct social engagement may not be tangible, it is certainly more fulfilling in its direct action than House. When thinking about indirect engagement, the goal of both pieces is to increase consciousness in the viewer. Both do this successfully to some extent, but House caters to an audience accustomed to elite art institutions, a contrast to the community which this piece represents, while Womanhouse works through solidarity and collective identity in formation and viewership. Furthermore, Womanhouse is part of a conceptual lineage within the second wave feminist movement. Lippard traces it along with other works as some of the first artworks both discussing domestic experiences of women and taking public space. It is thus, part of a movement about social change rather than the independence of 'House'.

It is critical to view the different means of creating socially engaged art, and the ways in which they mean to create identity consciousness. Using Kester's dialogical model we can analyze the efficacy of art in creating either direct social change or cultural change. By having artwork connected to communities and movements, we can help ensure that the artwork does not make its message isolated from the audience.
