---
layout: narrative
title: A Subtlety, Woman's SugarHouse
author: Liya Harris-Harrell
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

When looking at what makes works of art relevant in the discussion of social change, there are some important factors that have to be considered. These factors are how the audience is included in the discussion of the work, the process in which the artist(s) go about achieving their final product, and the outcome of the work or works of art. The Marvelous Sugar Baby and Womanhouse, are two collective projects that take different approaches towards creating a dialogue on the social conditions that defines the United States American culture.

The Marvelous Sugar Baby, a collection of sugar sculptures made by Kara Walker, creates dialogue on the past in its relation to the present. Focusing specifically on the sugar trade in its relation to slavery and current ideas surrounding the African American identity as a part of larger culture. The main piece of the show was a sphinxlike sculpture made out of refined sugar. This sculpture had a Black woman in a sphinx position. While the focus of these pieces were focused on commemorations of what slaves and underpaid workers went through and still go through in the harvesting of sugar, Walker also tries to subvert this through the ways in which she modeled the pieces and utilized the material of sugar. As Walker’s point of creating a Mammy subtlety was related to giving her a power and sexuality not related to the preexisting stereotype of the Mammy.

The artists of Womanhouse also worked to redirect preexisting ideas and understandings by taking common household tasks associated with women and bringing them out of the stereotypes that were prevelant through society at the time. “This immense and immensely successful project was an attempt to concretize the fantasies and oppressions of women's experience” (Lippard, 57) The rooms the artist created took many items, activities, etc. that were associated with femininity and brought them into a new light that was meaningful for the artist that worked on them. These rooms were created as individual pieces as a part of a wider project. In partnership with the California Institute of the Arts, two well-known artist and teachers ( Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro) worked with their students to bring their own experiences and ideas to the discussion on women’s experiences.

Both pieces take different approaches on the way in which their audience was allowed to interact with the art pieces themselves. These differences in interactions has to do with the differing time period in which the art installations came to exist,  but also it had to do with when certain individuals were even allowed into the space, as was the case with Womanhouse. The Marvelous Sugar Baby, while a temporary installation due to the temporality of the medium and the demolition of the installation space was still a well-documented piece. This documentation, done by the archival team associated with Walker was not only limited to these professional. The documentation was also included by the audience as they viewed Walker’s piece. In allowing the audience to interact with the subtilties through photography and social media, Walker’s instillation was not limited to an understanding of the piece in its temporary space. Walker’s work becomes dialogical in nature as it extends outward to social media, as even those individuals who may not see Walker’s pieces through firsthand experience are able to interact with them through the framing of whoever took the picture. The inclusion of Instagram post, in the archive, along with digital footage  (photos and videos) of people interacting with the show becomes in  a way becomes a part of the conversation that Walker’s subtilties is having on the African American identities and stereotypes in the larger society. As it could be said, and is discussed in articles discussing The Marvelous Sugar Baby,  that in the interactions with these pieces there is a kind of simulation of the same violence and action against the Black community, specifically Black women. While outside of the control of Walker, she hints that she expected some of these responses to her show but did not actively work to dissuade such interactions to arise. “I put a giant 10-foot vagina in the world and people respond to giant 10-foot vaginas in the way that they do. It’s not unexpected.” (Kara Walker) By knowing the kinds of responses that could arise from here work, and letting them do so Walker acts as artist as an agitator. Allowing her to further her discussion on power, in the past, to be extended to a conversation on power as it is used today.  These photographs that rise out of Walker’s work are not the point of Walker’s work, however they document reactions of the effectiveness of the narrative that Walker works toward creating with her work. In turn demonstrating just one way that Walker tries to transform social consciousness through the conversations surrounding her work.

The artists that worked on Womanhouse, use a different model than that of Walker to work towards creating a social transformation in the ways in which the woman’s experience is viewed by greater society. In understanding the work that was done by these artists, this could be labeled as the artist as a constructor. Through the collective conversation between these women through the creation of these piece; in addition to, the consciousness raising groups that were hosted in the space, these women were able to do internal social change on a smaller scale that would eventually spread out into larger society. As these consciousness raising groups were not limited to the Womanhouse itself, but could also be held once the instillations was over. The rooms of Womanhouse created a physical example of the collective and distinct experiences of the artists who created the different rooms.

By creating shared experiences and finding ways to document these experiences. Artists are able to work towards changing the ways in which we view the world. Whether or not the work of artist creates viewable changes in the ways that we engage with society, these works can create conversations that inform the way we as individuals—and eventually as a society—continue to go forward in thinking about the ways in which we relate to the world.

References
Art21. (2014, May 23). Kara Walker: “A Subtlety, or the Marvelous Sugar Baby” | Art 21 “Extended Play” Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRkP5rcXtys

Iasiello, S. (2017). Photographing A Subtlety or the Marvelous Sugar Baby: Kara Walker's Take on the Neo-Slave Narrative. Callaloo 40(4), 14-29.  https://www.muse.jhu.edu/article/723035.

Lucy, L. (1976). Household Images in Art. In From the Center: Feminst Essays on Women’s Art (56-50). New York City:Plume.
