---
layout: narrative
title: Creating Spaces For Women - Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women
author: Louise Rosler
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

Both Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women sparked from hostility towards women. Though Womanhouse addresses the struggles of women broadly, it was specifically aimed towards the inhospitable treatment of women in the art world. Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women, focused on a more niche population of women, and was provoked out of the immediate necessity to address the challenges facing drug addicts who turned to prostitution to support their habit in Zurich in the 1990s. Each developed from contexts where women's voices were not being acknowledged or respected, and hoped to provide spaces to change that. Yet, they were also uniquely situated in ways that dictated the goals and strategies of the projects. With this premise, I aim to further explore the contexts and execution of the projects in conversation with their goals and strategies for social transformation. Although Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women interacted with concepts of creating community and engaging in larger dialogue similarly, they were divergent in terms of self-definition. Ultimately, while both resulted in help and healing for their communities, neither showed true solidarity across diverse experiences of womanhood.

Womanhouse was created in 1972 through a program at California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) run by feminist artists, Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro. It emerged during a time when the linkage of femininity with art was delegitimizing in the formal art world. Especially in the 50's and 60's, women artists veered away from techniques that were seen as 'feminine' because of their 'implications of inferiority' (Lippard 57). Chicago and Schapiro directly challenged these limits of expression by developing an intensive art program specifically for women. The program allowed women to create without the evaluation of the male-dominated art world, which was focused on form and individual recognition.

In this context, Womanhouse was conceived. It demanded serious emotional and physical labor, beginning with rebuilding the house. This was a full time job for the women in the program--Faith Wilding, an artist involved with the project, said in an interview that each participant had at least five hours per day of scheduled time to work on the house. In theory, this group labor would create community, forming bonds amongst the participants. The collaborative effort from the women directly challenged the competition that cultivates male domination over women. As bell hooks states, 'between women, male supremacist values are expressed through suspicious, defensive, and competitive behavior' (hooks 32). This 'woman-hating' and competitiveness was clearly reflected in the rejection of 'feminine' art at the time. By creating a community based on support and collaboration, Womanhouse was fighting against male supremacy.

The act of rebuilding the house was significant because it represented the reconstruction women's relationships with each other. It was also a cathartic experience, through which the women redefined their relationships with the home itself. In this space they reimagined ways of creating art so that women were not measured according to standards which operated in systems of male domination. 'Feminine' forms of art (e.g. crochet) were embraced, and there was space allowed for a focus on content. Normative notions of quality in art have historically been centered on the visual pleasure that it stimulates and subjective notions of beauty (posited as objective). Feminist art challenges these assumptions, allowing space for women to express themselves freely. In this way, Womanhouse was especially effective in igniting conversations regarding the experiences of women, and challenging existing patriarchal and elitist systems of power.

Womanhouse shocked the 1970s art world, and its recognition brought awareness to women's experience. It aimed to create new visions of the human experience past white men; the woman's experience was a pathway to understanding the human experience more fully. It is important to note that this experience was essentialized and generally limited to the white, middle-class housewife. Nonetheless, Womanhouse allowed for new, empowering conversations to be had beyond the individual women involved in its creation.

While Womanhouse began by creating a space of empowerment for women, and then transitioned into broader consciousness-raising, Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women operated somewhat in the other direction. It began with an existing problem: the status of drug addicts who turned to prostitution to support their habit. As Kester points out, 'Many of these women were virtually homeless. Stigmatized by Swiss society, subject to violent attacks by their clients and harassment by the police, they were unable to find any place to sleep during the day' (Kester 2). In the context of these issues, the intervention facilitated conversations that were intended to provide solutions to address some of the challenges for these women. It created a temporary community where drug addicts and prostitutes were humanized.

Similarly to Womanhouse, the boat talks were a space where traditional power hierarchies could be challenged. Because they took place completely isolated from the outside world, participants were unburdened by the confines of media scrutiny. Expectations and norms would have dictated the actions of participants in the outside world, but the creation of a separate space allowed for open and authentic dialogue. A new community was created with the specific goal that they collaborated towards.

While the goal was geared towards helping the women in Zurich who were affected by drug addiction, it did not center their voices nearly enough. According to the WochenKlausur website, amongst those involved were almost sixty experts, including: 'all of the secretaries of the Swiss political parties, the mayor and four Zurich city councilors, two prosecuting attorneys, the editors in chief of the biggest Swiss newspapers, police chiefs, and specialists from the fields of medicine, prevention and therapy.' None of these experts mentioned were the women whom the intervention was intended for. Contrary to Womanhouse, where women were the central creators of their new realities, Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women used outsiders to define solutions. The end result they settled on was the construction of a temporary shelter for women to sleep in during the day--a space without men.

Both Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women found that a women-only space was necessary in order for the women the projects were directed towards to exist; they reached this conclusion taking different routes. Womanhouse sprouted from the desire for self-definition of women in art, while Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women was directly aimed at improving the conditions for drug addicted women in Zurich. Because Womanhouse was focalized on the experiences of women artists at a prestigious art institution, it posited the idea of a universal oppression that erased the diversity of women's experiences and interactions with patriarchy. With Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women, we see another facet of the ways that women face sexist oppression. The women struggling with drug addiction in this context may be more aware that 'being discriminated against or exploited because one is female may be dehumanizing, but it may not be as painful, dehumanizing, or threatening as being without food or shelter, as starvation, as being deathly ill but unable to obtain medical care' (hooks 39). However, this project did not directly focus on the voice of its women. Overall, both Womanhouse and Intervention to Aid Drug Addicted Women offer temporary or concentrated support to their communities, but are lacking in true, sustained solidarity that allows diverse experiences to be shared.
