---
layout: narrative
title: Culture, collaboration, and consciousness in the strategies of Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde
author: Max Gruber
date: 31 October 2019
week: three
---

The project Womanhouse, begun in 1971, was a collaborative effort between art students and faculty at Fresno State College to create a new form of art for women and by women. Womanhouse defied artistic conventions by creating an installation piece that was the shared labor of many artists, with each room defining a different focus around the topics of gender roles, domesticity, and womanhood. Both in terms of its gesture and its subject matter, Womanhouse employed unique strategies to achieve social transformation that pushed feminism, and art in general, forward. Similarly groundbreaking was the 1968 art project Tucum'n Arde, a project which blurred the lines of art, investigative journalism, and the social sciences to offer a scathing critique of the military regime in Argentina. While the differing social and historical contexts of both projects may suggest their incompatibility, a comparison of the two works and their strategies to achieve social transformation leads to a more thorough understanding of how seemingly small efforts can in fact lead to large scale engagement from the public and a rethinking of the role of art in social change. Specifically, a comparison projects proves useful in understanding how artists contend with dominant culture, collaborate with other artists and professionals to overcome institutional barriers, and use their work to affect consciousness and change on the individual level.

Both projects had to contend with a dominant culture in order to promote their messages, with Womanhouse isolating itself from this culture's influence while Tucum'n Arde openly confronted and combated it. Stuart Hall's 'Deconstructing the Popular' outlines the parameters and significance of cultural conflict. Here, Hall states that 'It [the study of popular culture] looks at the process by which these relations of dominance and subordination are articulated. It treats them as a process: the process by means of which some things are actively preferred so that others can be dethroned.' In this way, both Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde looked to use art as a tool through which to undo the subordination of popular culture through new cultural productions which would be preferred by the public and thus dethrone the dominant culture. In the case of Womanhouse, the dominant culture is that of a patriarchal artworld and society at large. In order to combat this, the artists created a house with different artworks in each room dedicated solely to the investigation of women's roles in society. Womanhouse strategically did not address the male gaze but was meant to be a space for women. In fact, the exhibition was only open to men on certain days of the week and was closed to men during consciousness-raising activities and some performances. This approach is similar to ideas of self-definition and self-determination put forward by Larry Neal and other contributors to the Black Arts and Black Power movements (Neal 44). Essentially, Womanhouse provided a space in which women could create narratives which were not filtered through the patriarchy. Despite its feigned isolation from the world of men, the strategy of Womanhouse is still revealing of what Hall would call the 'tensions' that make up this cultural discourse. It is important to recognize that the reason why these artists felt the need to create Womanhouse in the first place was the existence of an external environment which was explicitly hostile. One example was the contemporaneous scandal at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, where organizers pointed out an egregiously low proportion of female solo exhibitions to see how societal and institutional forces may have prompted Womahouse. (Lippard 98). The 'dominant culture' addressed in Tucum'n Arde was the state, not an identity group necessarily. Even so, the conflict of state controlled 'culture', that is, their presentation of reality with the truth lies at the core of Tucum'n Arde. In this way, the artists of Tucum'n Arde employed the opposite strategy as Womanhouse, explicitly pointing out the faults and shortcomings of the state's economic mismanagement and subsequent neglect of Tucum'n. Womanhouse was less direct in this way as there was not a room dedicated to the failure of men.

Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde both included collaborations with non-artists in order to add greater dimension to their projects, a strategy which allowed them to be more socially impactful than they might have been otherwise. While the space of Womanhouse was mainly an art installation, it would frequently play host to a number of seminars and consciousness-raising activities that addressed the larger context of the feminist movement. Tucum'n Arde was an even more collaborative affair, as the artists had to coordinate with union leaders, sociologists, photographers, and journalists in order to build their case against the government (Camnitzer 65). Here, Tucum'n Arde was more reliant on external collaboration than Womanhouse, as the exhibition itself would have been incomplete if not for their interdisciplinary focus. The majority of the time Womanhouse conveyed its message through its artworks, with the performances and seminars providing an intermittently changing dimension to the project. Additionally, Tucum'n Arde had to contend with a predatory state that threatened to imprison or close their exhibition. Because of this, an entirely new dimension of the project included its subversive public graffiti campaign, the dissemination of ticket stubs, and the exhibition of the artwork, not in a gallery, but in a union building (Camnitzer 65).

Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde employed varied and differing strategies in order to generate social consciousness which would further their causes even after the doors to the exhibition had closed. Womanhouse sought to operate on a more universal level than Tucum'n arde, addressing experiences felt by all women. Chicago and Schapiro state that, 'The aim of the Feminist Art Program is to help women restructure their personalities to be more consistent with their desires to be artists and to help them build their artmaking out of their experiences as women. 'Womanhouse seemed to offer the perfect context for this educational process' (Womanhouse original catalogue essay). With Womanhouse, then, the strategy was to arrive at a more complex understanding of feminism and womanhood through the creation of the space. In terms of the public at large, the space would function similarly to a consciousness-raising session although in a radically different form.'While Womanhouse addressed larger structures of patriarchy and female oppression, Tucum'n Arde was a project situated in a highly specific political moment and time with a very specific goal. Informed by the writings of Regis Debray and Che Guevara, many of the artists in Tucum'n Arde hoped to function as a Revolutionary vanguard:the focquistavanguard, in its single-minded commitment to military action, will model a proper revolutionary discipline for emulation by the peasants and working-class, 'imbuing' them with revolutionary fervor. The 'small motor' of the foco will bring the 'big motor' of the masses to political consciousness, and 'set them in motion' (Kester 10).

The intellectual context of the time and the nature of Argentinian's political oppression meant that the artists of Tucum'n Arde had to contend with potential violence and danger in a different way than the artists of Womanhouse. Even so, both groups sought to imbue their audiences with a new outlook and resolve, to stir them from 'passive acquiescence to conscious agency' (Kester 3)

Both Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde broke with convention by mounting large-scale installations that drew on the labor of several artists. While their political and social contexts varied, they were united in their subversion of a dominant culture, collaboration with non-artists and specialists, and their stirring of a larger change in consciousness to achieve their goals. By employing these strategies, both Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde cultivated enough discussion to remain relevant long after their doors had closed. In this way, their strategies, despite their particularities and differences in execution, functioned in a similar way. Ultimately, Womanhouse and Tucum'n Arde looked to correct social norms through the creation of a space in which cultural production and non-art discourse would meet. By choosing to approach social change from this lense, both groups succeeded in drawing great visibility to their causes while also presenting artworks that broke with convention and would influence artists for decades to come.
