---
layout: narrative
title: Allie Response
author: Allie Naganuma
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

In “Deconstructing the Popular,” Stuart Hall says the study of ‘popular culture’ is the study of the “relations which define ‘popular culture’ in a continuing tension to the dominant culture” (Hall). This definition conceptualizes popular culture in constant flux due to its responses to, tensions with, and commentary on dominant culture (Hall). The field aims to study the process by which “relations of dominance and subordination are articulated,” in other words, the process by which some ideas are validated and others are denigrated (Hall). Hall’s description of popular culture situates the Black Arts Movement within a larger historical network of movements that have existed in tension with dominant, white culture. Hall’s ideas also help us understand avant-garde art, which aims to respond to the dominant culture and comment on conventional perspectives. Taken together, one might see the Black Arts Movement and avant-garde art as two products of popular culture, though they employ different strategies to respond to the dominant culture.

In “Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation,” Larry Neal reveals how the Black Arts Movement was a direct response to the oppressive and dehumanizing circumstances Black people were struggling against during the Civil Rights Era. Neal explains that the Black Arts Movement was created to advance Black self-definition and self-determination during the Civil Rights Era (Neal, 39). Self-definition is the idea that Black people need to define themselves and their experiences on their own terms, not those of the dominant, white culture (Neal, 40). Neal writes that the process of self-definition can help Black people overcome DeBois’ idea of “double-consciousness,” in which Black people are forced to view themselves through the distorted lens of the white gaze, while simultaneously knowing their true identity (Neal, 41). Self-determination is the idea that Black people need to have complete control over their own lives (Neal, 39). These concepts are important to the Black Arts movement, which aims to link art and politics to advance Black liberation and the construction of the Black Nation (Neal, 39).

As the Black Arts Movement constructed Black culture and esthetics, it served the role of building an alternative value system and way of looking at the world that rejected the dominant culture. Instead of working to reshape the existing white-dominated culture, the Movement wanted to create something entirely new. Neal says that culture is essential to leading a successful revolution: “A cultureless revolution is a bullcrap tip...a revolution without a culture would destroy the very thing we are trying to save along with our lives” (Neal, 44). Without a cohesive cultural system underlying a political movement, Neal says that people begin to lose their vision for the future and forget about the alternative culture they are fighting to protect (Neal, 44). The Black Arts created a new toolset of images, narratives, values, and concepts with which Black people could envision themselves (both their individual and collective experiences), helping them to build a new collectively-built Black culture/esthetic.

The Black Arts Movement used forms like the Blues to make the ideas underlying Black culture/esthetics readily accessible to the everyday Black person. Neal says, “Black Art must speak to the lives and psychic of Black People...[Black artists] are not speaking of an art that screams and masturbates before white audiences…[Black artists] are speaking of an art that addresses itself directly to Black people” (Neal, 44). Given its goals of constructing an alternative culture, transparency, accessibility, and relatability were key characteristics of the Black Arts Movement.

Avant-garde art might be considered a product of popular culture, given its aversion to the dominant culture. Avant-garde artists disrupt, shock, and challenge the viewer to re-evaluate their conventional form of perception (Kester, 14). Luis Camnitzer writes that “...art is a tool for combat...To subvert a situation means to create a perceptual distance from the status quo, one that prompts re-evaluation and elicits the will to make changes” (Camnitzer, 19). Avant-garde pieces are provocative, open-ended, and complex, eliciting a wide distribution of responses and interpretations from audience members (Kester, 16). Avant-garde pieces specifically aim to be anti-discursive, to avoid objective comprehension and therefore remain immune to capitalist commodification (Kester 16). In other words, as long as the work is opaque and inaccessible to some degree, avant-garde work can avoid being co-opted into consumer society.

Avant-garde art and the Black Arts Movement both aim to challenge the dominant culture, but have different strategies and end-goals. While the avant-garde aims to remain opaque and incomprehensible to its audiences, the Black Arts Movement aims to be as accessible as possible. This divergence in techniques is reflective of their differing end-goals and intended audiences. The avant-garde largely speaks to members belonging to the dominant culture and aims to “shak[e] the platform that is taken for granted” (Camnitzer, 20). While the avant-garde artist pokes and prods at the dominant culture, the Black Arts Movement decides to leave the dominant culture behind entirely. The Black Arts Movement is uninterested in reforming white ways of looking at the world, and instead turns its focus directly to Black people and builds an entirely new alternative culture. For these reasons, one might describe avant-garde art as an ‘agitation’ technique, while the Black Arts Movement is more of a ‘construction’ technique (Camnitzer, 20). Camnitzer writes that construction techniques aim to affect the ways people perceive the world to make larger structural changes to society, in other words, “helping to build a new culture” (Camnitzer, 20). While Camnitzer’s original conception of the ‘constructor’ imagined the artist as reconstructing existing culture/society, we might re-imagine his definition to include the construction of entirely new systems of perception, values, and narratives so that the Black Arts Movement might be encompassed as well.

Hall’s description of popular culture helps us situate the avant-garde and the Black Arts Movement within a larger framework of art that aims to address, challenge, and respond to the dominant culture and society. It is clear, however, that the avant-garde and the Black Arts Movement, while similar in their broad goals of challenging dominant culture, differ greatly in their strategies and ultimate end-goals. While the avant-garde artist aims to create anti-discursive, incomprehensible pieces, the Black Arts Movement aims to be as accessible to the everyday Black person as possible. The avant-garde also uses ‘agitation’ to critique the dominant culture, while the Black Arts Movement takes a‘ construction’ approach, rejecting white culture completely and opting to build something new.

Camnitzer, Luis. Conceptualism in Latin American Art. Didactics of Liberation., Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2007.

Hall, Stuart. Deconstructing the Popular. People’s History and Socialist Theory. 1981.

Kester, Grant. Conversations Pieces. Community and Communication in Modern Art University of California Press: Berkeley, 2011.

Neal, Larry. Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation. Ebony. Vol 24, Issue 10., 1969.
