---
layout: narrative
title: Fighting for Representation, Dissent in Black Art and the Problem of the 'Popular'
author: Bria Dinkins
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

My idea of “popular” is the adjective that describes something as representative of the majority or public instead of intellectuals or elite. “Popular culture” then is the term for the summation or particularity of public tastes, traditions that are in constant change. In Stuart Hall’s excerpt of “Deconstructing the Popular”, he describes popular culture as active, moving and aware— as a consciousness. He writes that this new popular culture description he is positing, manifests in activity born out of the “social and material conditions of particular classes”. The artifacts of these activities are pieces of tradition and practices. But more importantly, Hall’s consideration of the “changing and uneven relations of force” points towards a dissent within the popular including the potential ways to disrupt the dominant, hence the “conception” of itself being “polarized”.

In his Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation, Larry Neal identifies what he believes to be the correct way to approach toppling dominant culture. In his piece, Neal condemns what I considered to be part of black popular culture and names what he believes to be the strong components of Black culture and this may be exactly what Stuart Hall’s new definition of “popular” describes. The traditions and living artifacts which Hall insists are an integral part of popular culture are evident in Neal’s analysis of the Black Arts movement and he begins this analysis by asserting that this arts movement is far older than the Black Power movement. I hope to explore further how Hall’s idea of popular interacts with Neal’s ideas of what makes the Black Arts movement and what he believes to be counterproductive or harmful. I would like to explore how Neal’s ideas might be related to Hall’s idea of internal dissent and tensions with the dominant as well as see what Neal could be saying had he used or subscribed to the terms “popular” or “dominant” in his paper. To Neal are these separate or the same thing?

If Hall’s dominant culture is Neal’s “Western white esthetic” (40), then this dominant culture is also the one which takes from the popular and ignores or disproves of what they do not. Neal writes that the white culture  “steal(s) and suck Black energy, an energy which in the slop jars of their minds they distort and corrupt in their own sick images” (40). If Black popular culture exists on its own as well as within popular culture as a bigger whole, and popular culture is subject to consumption by the dominant, then Neal wants to either re-define black popular culture or subvert the identity of “popular” by forming a culture meant specifically for Black people about the success of Black people (self-definition and self-determination).

To Neal, aspects of the popular culture inhibit the movement and instead contribute to the dominant culture’s perception of Black people by being too performative, too expected and too easy to dismiss. In his analysis, Neal’s assessment of the Black Arts Movement relates to Hall’s ideas about the popular being a “process by means of which some things are actively preferred so that others can be dethroned”. If this comment speaks to the shift between choices of representation and the dissent to choose the face of culture, then Neal may believe that the popular prefers Black Literature and plays into the hands of the dominant, by existing in the popular. For this to be true, Neal would believe that popular culture is too closely related to the dominant anyway and too broad a category. If the popular is too broad and inclusive a category, then the dominant can be disguised as the popular or the popular can overlap with dominant. Neal sites Andy Warhol and art of the body as material artifacts of white culture which in its entirety is devoid, dead and morally corrupt. If Andy Warhol would be seen as popular (even in Hall’s definition), then Neal is critiquing the popular because it is too close to the dominant and reproduces dominant and hegemonic ideals. He may have believed this about black literature too.

Neal’s piece is proof of the dissent within the Black arts or Black culture in general. Neal shares that the great leaders and artists of the movement and its history were not speaking of “protest” art nor art “that screams and masturbates before white audiences” (44). Neal suggests that it is “Negroe Literature and Civil Rights Literature” that does this (44). The art and artists Neal praises, only gather and communicate with Black folk.

Neal’s idea of a thriving Black culture would rely on the expression of artistic forms in addition to the “values, the life styles, and the feelings of the people expressed in everyday life” (48). Neal writes of a “Black Esthetic”, a preoccupation and admiration for Black beauty in conjunction with the destruction of the “white thing” and ability for the white gaze (40, 44). By saying this, Neal is implicates the popular as another primarily “white thing” with still overwhelming white gaze. The fight for Black (popular) culture that Neal hopes to win is in divorcing itself from that larger popular culture and create more localized one. In this way, Neal is resisting certain black forms to exert domination over representation in order to fully break out of the space of culture and the popular which has been defined by whiteness.

If Black Literature is closer to insiting exemplary violence or spontaneity by demanding freedom and calling attention to one’s own subjugation, then the blues, Black performance and other Black forms of art that Neal uplifts, assumes that the community has this knowledge and is instead interested in spending its time invested in its own history and honoring the “Third World Struggle” it aligns itself with. It is this level of deep self reflection and the commitment to protecting and fostering it which Neal sees as entirely separate and more worthwhile.

Hall’s and Neal’s pieces in conjunction help us to understand the roles of agitator and constructor much more, but in the context of dissent within the popular and its relationship to the dominant. If Neal hopes to create a receptive and proud black community, his idea is about constructing culture. He rejects the agitation that he believes is inherently wrong with black literature and other pleading or performative acts. Neal and Hall may also help us further the naming of methodologies like Camnitzer’s salpicón and compota, and relate them to the general idea that “popular” cultures, the practices and artifacts that are produced by them, are non genealogical, and can only be described as embodied processes which shift, sprout and grow through a combination of pedagogy, poetry and more. Part of the process includes active external and internal fights.

If culture is a battlefield and culture can be defined as a somewhat spectacular interaction or clash between the social, cultural and economic (and the histories of these), then popular culture may aim to choose certain strategies over others if they are perceived as detrimental to the war effort and does this in order to thwart dominant suppression. But if parts of popular culture is somehow reaching for the dominant, this also may mean that the sides of the battlefield are not all that clear. The popular culture Hall speaks of is complicated because it takes into account the specific identity formations of particular classes and may be alluding to the fact that there are or could exist liminal pieces of culture. This is in part troubling because in addition to recognizing the dissent that is crucial in the movement and formation of the popular, it also allows conceptions of power to be fractured into even more pieces.  
