---
layout: narrative
title: A Cultural Battleground, The Politics of Black Esthetics
author: Diana Martínez
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

“Black power teaches us that we must have ultimate control over our own lives. It teaches us that we must make a place on this Earth for ourselves, and that we must construct, through struggle, a world that is compatible with our highest vision.”
(Neal, 39)

A collective’s imagined sense of identity infinitely evolves through a series of sedimented experiences. Throughout this evolution, traditions and practices are formed to conceive heterogenous cultures and subcultures. Nonetheless, this paper directs specific attention to the dichotomy between the “popular culture” and the “dominant culture.” Larry Neal, an acclaimed cultural critic and playwright, articulates this binary in “Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation.” His revolutionary text, published during the Black Power Era, ultimately calls for a black cultural nation built on Black Esthetics.
20th century Cultural Studies theorist Stuart Hall provides a theoretical framework to further understand the significance of Black Esthetics and avant-garde models of disruption. In “Deconstructing the popular”, Hall draws specific attention to “popular culture” and its tension to the “dominant culture.” Hall’s framework highlights a cultural binary defined by the dominant and the subordinate, the oppressor and the oppressed. This relationship is molded by a “tension” that stems from systemic inequities. In recognizing the antagonism that exists between both groups, Hall characterizes culture as a dynamic battlefield where the oppressor and the oppressed engage in a continuous struggle to reinterpret the “field of culture.”

In “Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation,” Neal adds to Hall’s cultural theory by defining culture as the “truest expressions of pain, aspirations, and group wisdom…a definite feeling about the world.” (Neal, 43) In other words, culture conveys the emotions, desires, and knowledge of a collective experience. As a result, it shapes new perceptions of being and relating to the world. Furthermore, Neal reaffirms Hall’s cultural theory by differentiating between the oppressor, an Anglo Western society, and the oppressed, descendants of the African Diaspora. In establishing the vertical power dynamics, Neal sketches out a cultural struggle between the dominant and the subordinate. This tension is a product of an inherent lack of empathy and a hunger for power. More importantly, this tension rationalizes Neal’s call for black liberation during a period of social unrest and urban turmoil.

Neal’s 1969 piece was written during the climax of the Black Power Era, a cultural and political movement in the United States that advocated for a black revolution and liberation founded on self-determination and self-definition. The Black Power Era was a response to the increased political and physical violence from white Americans who felt threatened by the recent Civil Rights gains of the 1960s. The Black Power Era’s essence vibrates through Neal’s text which asserts the need for black liberation, a radical and militant reimagination of a world where black communities are emancipated from the subordinate role that systemic and racialized violence forced onto them.
For Neal, the Black Arts movement was the locus of a new radical cultural paradigm that fiercely advocated for black liberation. He argues that in the cultural battlefield, the dominant white culture invisiblizes black experiences by neglecting to acknowledge the impact of systemic oppression: “Europe and America are unable within the confines of even their ideas of art to deal with the real issues confronting Man today. And the most important of which is the liberation of the majority of Mankind.” (Neal, 40) In this case, the dominant culture prefers to omit the struggles of non-Western peoples and instead opts for a culture fixed on an exploitative relationship between art, sex, and the body (or as Neal phrases it, “Andy Warhol madness”).

Thus there’s a need for a “Black Esthetic,” a paradigm that elevates black experiences by proposing a “new system of moral and philosophical thought” (Neal, 40) Following in Hall’s framework, Black Esthetics is the response of the oppressed to the oppressor’s cultural hegemony: Neal refuses to use the analytical lens of the oppressor to understand black culture, so he creates his own language of esthetics.  In reenvisioning a Black Esthetic, the Black Arts movement heals the soul of the Black Nation by deconstructing the “Double Consciousness” and creating “One Committed Soul” that accounts for the multifaceted Black political thought. (Neal, 41) Equally importantly, the Black Esthetic liberates the black community from having to define itself through the gaze of the oppressor. Ultimately, Black Esthetics creates a black cultural nation by merging the principles of self-determination and self-definition with a collective memory.
Black esthetics is one of the most radical and powerful models of cultural disruption. Nonetheless, other approaches such as dialogical art and the avant-garde also add a degree of complexity to the cultural battle between the dominant and subordinate. In Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art, Art History scholar Grant Kester characterizes dialogical art as an interactive art piece that evokes a “process of dialogue and collaboration.” (Kester, 10) As opposed to the artist preconfiguring the meaning of the artwork, dialogical art derives its message from the interaction between the viewer and the piece.

Dialogical art has been applied by avant-garde artists who seek to disrupt the established power dynamics between “popular culture” and “dominant culture.” Wochen Klausur’s Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women, exemplifies this. It was a dialogical art piece unfolded in Zurich, Switzerland in 1994. It brought together sex workers, activists, policy makers, and journalists to discuss harm-reduction strategies and potential resources for sex workers in Shedhalle, Zurich. (Kester, 2) By placing these various community actors in the same space, Klausur sought to eliminate the social stratification that existed among them. Thus, Intervention to Aid Drug-Addicted Women challenged the hegemonic culture by creating a horizontal space that temporarily neutralized power dynamics.

In conclusion, Hall’s cultural theorical framework emphasizes the importance of understanding how tensions between the popular culture and the dominant culture shape culture overtime. This ongoing struggle is reflected through Neal’s call for black liberation and Klausur’s dialogical art piece. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that radical change involves a cultural revolution that reenters the experience of the marginalized. Hall’s framework reminds us that this is achievable because culture is constantly changing.

Bibliography

Kester, Grant. Conversations Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art.
University of California Press: Berkeley, 2011.

Neal, Larry. “Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation” in We Wanted a Revolution: Black Radical Women 1965-85.
