---
layout: narrative
title: Black Art as Agitator and Constructor
author: Eva Baron
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

Dynamic and shifting, popular culture remains saturated with an underlying tension, one that, as Stuart Hall alludes to, is considered a process by which “relations of dominance and subordination are articulated” (Hall). Rather than being a static, uniform entity, popular culture assumes at its center the “changing and uneven relations of force which define the field of culture,” a quality that demands continual turbulence between subordinate and dominant. Occupying a position of intense ambiguity within popular culture, Black art, as described by Larry Neal in “Any Day Now,” retains features both of a suppressed and expressed culture. While historically being “dethroned,” Black art nevertheless functions as an almost pseudo-religious vehicle of legitimization, of unity within Black communities throughout the United States. Simultaneously “subordinate” and “dominant” due to the constant slippage between cultural “articulations,” as Hall writes, Black art operates as a form of agitation as well as construction, revealing the dual power of art in the formation of a uniquely self-defined Black culture.

Disrupting the split vision of “Double Consciousness,” Black art agitates the dominant white culture through subversion, through the creation of a narrative far removed from “white eyes” (Neal 41). Acting to “clarify and make more bearable the human experience” (Neal 43), Black art pierces through dominant culture in an attempt to resist historically oppressive white paradigms. The resistance integral to the Black art Neal characterizes provokes the “process” by which popular culture “actively prefer[s]” expression originating in systems of power. Antagonizing and troubling these hegemonic structures, Black art deconstructs the “white thing,” destroys the “white ways of looking at the world” in order to achieve a radical sense of liberation and self-love (Neal 44). The deconstruction of the “white thing,” however, relies upon subversion, one which seemingly necessitates a “dethroned” status. As a result of its traditionally “subordinate formation[s]” in the United States, Black art proves disruptive due to its explicit and forceful rupture from white normativity. Rather than perpetuating a cycle of submission to “white eyes,” Black art celebrates “life and the ability of man to control and shape his destiny” (Neal 42), an act of subversion that inherently threatens as well as agitates the status quo. When articulated as an expression that fundamentally divorces from and questions white hegemony, Black art reverses its “dethroned” position in the United States, catalyzing reactions of shock owing to, as Luis Camnitzer explains in Conceptualism in Latin American Art, the inability to “harness and control” agitation (Camnitzer 19).

Overcoming the impulse to conform to “white ways of looking at the world,” moreover, mandates the construction of a self-defined culture through Black art, initiating the shift from agitator to constructor. Rooted in the “fundamental experiences of the [Black] Nation,” the Black Arts Movement strives for “intimacy,” one that reflects the “general psychology of [the] people” (Neal 43). The intimacy implicit in Black art, however, cannot exist isolated from community, from an established culture that incorporates, as Neal insists, “the truest expression of…pain, aspirations, and group wisdom” (43). Arising from the “destruction of the white thing” and the agitation of dominant culture, the Black Arts Movement is subsequently given the opportunity to engineer its own culture, a “revolutionary moral vision and a system of values” (Neal 48). While certainly harnessing tools of provocation, art and the artist as a cultural constructor emphasize “ways of perceiving” (Camnitzer 19), instead choreographing culture to reflect and reinforce “the values, the life styles, and the feelings of the people as expressed in everyday life” (Neal 48). Once a self-determined culture emerges from agitation, the constructor sculpts it into a center of gravity, a mode of “strengthening group unity and making radical change” (Neal 48). The transformation of Black art as functioning as an agitator to a constructor marks a similar departure from “subordinate formations” to more dominant ones, in which Black culture becomes its own established and legitimized Nation, as Neal would describe it. Testament to the sliding of “dominant” and “subordinate” formations within popular culture, Black art assumes the role of constructor following agitation, instituting its own unique, self-defined culture that “shape[s]…the spiritual helpmate of the Black Nation” (Neal 49).

Agitation and construction, however, prove symbiotic, constantly in conversation, thus illustrating the synthesis between the two facially disparate forces in Black art. Continually “polarized,” in a deep “tension” that defines it as a “constantly changing field,” popular culture remains fluid, determined by shifting power relations that “actively [prefer] some things so that others can be dethroned” (Hall). As popular culture remains in perpetual fluctuation, as do the contributions of Black art, malleable in the face of “changing and uneven relations of force” (Hall). Rather than isolating the role of the artist as agitator and constructor, Black art embraces both of these political and cultural tools, encompassing a greater understanding of the slippage between the subordinate and the dominant. Agitation as an artistic mode, then, weaves the thread of construction through itself, as indicated by Neal’s language,
“...[Black art is] not speaking of ‘protest’ art. [It] is not speaking of an art that screams and masturbates before white audiences…instead, they are speaking of an art that addresses itself directly to Black people; an art that speaks to us in terms of our feelings and ideas about the world…” (Neal 44).

While certainly retaining wisps of radical protest and rejection of white hegemony, agitation as an art form resists being defined by or curated for “white audiences,” instead seeking to “address itself directly to Black people.” Although Black art does provoke white audiences by “destroying the white thing,” this is nevertheless a secondary motivation, with explicit emphasis placed on creating Black art and culture for Black—not white—communities. The Black artist as a constructor similarly incorporates elements of agitation through the rupture of spaces that have historically been reserved for those with privilege or systematic power. Reinforcing the fact that “meaningful institutions that are run and controlled by Black People with a vision” is “as important as the gun” (Neal 49), these institutions seemingly shock by way of the space they occupy. Disrupting white hegemony with these “meaningful institutions” that subsequently aid in the construction of culture thus preserves qualities of agitation, further stressing Black art as slippery to classify. In constant conversation just as “dominant” and “subordinate” culture are, agitation and construction prove instrumental to the creation of a Black art, fluidly melting into one another.

Complicating strict categorization, Black art frustrates the dichotomies between agitator and constructor, absorbing both as crucial political and artistic vehicles for the establishment of a self-defined Black culture. While there seemingly remains a linear relationship between these two modes of artistic intervention—with construction mandating previous agitation to lay the groundwork for cultural production—Hall’s theories of popular culture refute sequential interpretation. Due to the ceaseless tension between “subordinate” and “dominant” culture, there is no opportunity to maintain a static or rigid approach to art, thus necessitating elasticity between agitation and construction. Despite the fact that Black art as an agitator certainly carved open the space for subsequent cultural construction, Black art never solely operated as an agitator nor solely as a constructor. In this sense, agitation and construction constantly influenced one another, merged into the other, developed into weapons that utilized self-definition and self-determination as its ammo. This mutual collapsing of agitator and constructor in the Black Arts Movement almost seems dialogical, urging the engagement of Black communities through provocation, through cultural unity, through the common goal of liberation. Perhaps placing both of these artistic functions into a fluid and endless conversation reflects the myriad of dialogues shared throughout the Black Arts Movement, dialogues that similarly rejected essentialism and instead emphasized the convergence of various artistic practices unified under the Black Nation.

Works Cited:

Camnitzer, Luis. Conceptualism in Latin American Art: Didactics of Liberation. University of
Texas Press, 2007.

Neal, Larry. “Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation.”
