---
layout: narrative
title: Border Art in the Context of Stuart Hall's Definition of Popular Culture
author: Isabella Fiorante
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

Hall’s theory forces us to confront the inherently political and economic nature of culture. If popular culture is in constant tension with what is dominant, and dominant culture is defined by formal cultural institutions, we can see both popular and dominant culture as being largely influenced by economics and politics, as those are the forces that have the power to establish and fund formal, dominant cultural institutions. We can then use this framework, established by Hall, to gain greater insight into the Border Art movement. Amy Sarah Carroll’s chapter establishes the connections between politics and art by explaining the lasting cultural effects of political policies such as the Bracero program and PRONAF. Carroll’s essay suggests that the political policies at the time defined a broad and overarching dominant culture of racism and nationalism. Hall continues to Carroll’s connections between cultures by characterizing the relationship between dominant culture and popular cultures as a relationship of tension. Hall’s theories then allow us to understand border art as a rejection of this dominant culture and as a product of the tension that exists between popular and dominant cultures.

Richard Lou’s Border Door is a great example of this tension. Lou installed a door along the American-Mexican border that only opened on the Mexican side. Lou then hung 134 keys on the door’s frame and invited any viewers of this door to “cross the border with dignity”. Copies of these keys were distributed in and around Tijuana. The installation of this border door was a powerful and rebellious, but inherently unlawful act. Border Door confronts the tension between political policy and lived reality and draws attention to the conflict between government and the institutions and the people whose lives they define through policy and lawmaking. Without the dominant culture being what is was, this work would have had less meaning and been less impactful. By interpreting Border Door through Hall’s framework, we can obtain a greater understanding of the work’s meaning and how it’s impact is dependent on the political circumstances at hand.

Continuing in this vein, we can see Light Up the Border as another instance of this tension. In the late 1980s, two prominent San Diego figures, one a town councilwoman and the other a former mayor, encouraged residents to shine their car headlights on a stretch of the border where supposedly undocumented workers frequenly entered San Diego under the cover of nighttime. In response, members of the Border Art Workshop / Taller de Arte Fronterizo practice held up mirrors to reflect the light back at the drivers, blinding them from observing whatever illicit activities were supposedly occurring. This work is confrontational, and draws our attention to the tension between government figures and artists and collaborators. The act of holding up mirrors, like many other BAW/TAF works and projects, would lose its meaning and purpose if not for this tension between dominant culture and emerging popular culture.

Through these pieces, we can understand how a popular culture was born of the tension between a dominant culture, defined by politics and government institutions, and a smaller subgroup being marginalized by said dominance. We can see the tension between border art and dominant culture by understanding that without government intervention in the borderlands, the need for artistic expression about the occuring oppression would not have existed and much of this art may have never been created. Through this lens, we can understand Hall’s theory about the importance of the relationship between subcultures and dominant ones.

To connect Hall’s theory with other theories we’ve discussed in class, we can look to Larry Neal’s essay, Any Day Now. Black Art and Black Liberation. Hall’s emphasis on who is defining what is “dominant” closely relates to Neal’s stance on Self-Definition and Self-Determination. In his essay, Neal defines the concept of Self-Defintion as the redefinition of black people and black culture through a non-white framework. Neal insists on the destruction of the societal standards that were created by and for white people and the redefinition of these standards by and for black people in America. Neal explains that the current political system “force[s us] to see ourselves through white eyes. We are made to evaluate our innermost impulses against [the white person’s]. And in the process, we do ourselves great spiritual and psychological harm”. Self-Definition aims to reverse this harm and allow African American’s to define themselves by their own terms; a privilege that those at the top of the power structure, in this case white Americans, have always been afforded. Neal defines Self-Determination as a continuation of the need for agency and ownership  the struggle for an African American nation that would allow black American individuals to be freed and liberated from the oppression of society in the United States; a society that is structurally set up to favor white Americans over black Americans. Neal defines this struggle in connection to a universal movement for Liberation amongst oppressed nations all over the world. Neal’s concepts connect with Hall’s insistence that a definition of popular culture must include the recognition of who is defining “dominant” culture. Neal acknowledges that only by defining the self for oneself can black people be liberated and in a similar vein, Hall gives more legitimacy to popular cultures by drawing attention to power dynamics and highlighting that those in power will always define the dominant as what is dominant for them, and try to minimize the importance of cultures that they see as subordinate. In many ways, Hall is calling for popular cultures to define themselves for themselves, and though they exist in relation to popular culture, by acknowledging the power structures that have enforced the dominant/subordinate binary Hall is giving greater space for a self-definition and self-determination of popular cultures. Both essays acknowledge and insist upon the importance of recognizing power structures and the forces that control what is seen as dominant, and by extension what is seen as subordinate.
