---
layout: narrative
title: The Black Arts Movement, the avant-garde, and popular culture
author: Jaimie Lopez
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---
The avant-garde, or art meant to disrupt common conceptions of the world, is a form that lies in changing cultural perceptions through art.  In a similar way, in his 1969 essay, Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation, Larry Neal outlines the goals of the Black Arts movement, how it should change culture, and how it will ultimately lead towards Black liberation.  In Stuart Hall’s essay, Notes on Deconstructing ‘The Popular’, Hall lays out a framework for understanding popular culture.  According to Hall, popular culture works in tension with the dominant culture, and is ever changing.  Using Stuart Hall’s definitions of popular culture, we can better examine Neal’s goal of creating a Black culture free of white rule within the context of the avant-garde movement.

Neals primary goal in Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation, is to define the role of the Black Arts movement within the context of the larger Black Power movement.  To begin, Neal rejects all words and definitions that are for or by white people, as using these terms only propagate and solidify white supremacy, furthering the enslavement of Black people.  In order to have true Black Liberation, Black people must be able to use their own language and have their own culture, free from white domination.  To accomplish this, Neal calls for the Black Arts movement to popularize Black self-expression, and create a language with which the Black general public can express themselves without white words.  This, in turn, frees Black people from their subjugation, and destroys white supremacy through the creation of a Black anti-culture.  This culture would help advance the Black Power movement, so that when a Black revolution does happen, there is a shared cultural history that can unite Black people.

Another component of Neal’s plan for a new Black culture includes establishing Black institutions.  These institutions include schools, colleges, theatres, churches, and community organizations.  Neal points out that not only does this create powerful places that create and teach Black culture, but that these institutions also create lasting, physical manifestations of Black culture.  These institutions function, then, as monuments of the Black Power movement.  In his examples, Neal highlights the importance of the Black Church, which has historically been where kept the African history of the enslaved people alive, and created a healing place away from the presence of white people: “The Black Church was the institutionalized form that Black people used to protect themselves from the spiritual and psychological brutality of the slave-masters” (Neal 42).  In another way, these institutions create spaces for Black people to create, think, and live, outside the view of the white man.  Neal emphasizes the importance of the modern Black Church as a locus for revolution: “Like Black Art, Black religion should be about strengthening group unity and making radical change” (Neal 48).  Institutions monumentalize culture, and make space for Black people to create culture, free from white supremacy.

Neal’s focus for the Black Arts movement falls directly in line with Stuart Hall’s dynamic model of popular culture.  Hall explains that culture works by favoring certain traits, while demonizing others: i.e. in dominant culture around the world, whiteness is favored, and blackness is demonized.  Throughout the essay, Neal shows his understanding of the processes that drive culture and the collective consciousness of a society, as described by Stuart Hall.  As Neal argues in this essay, because dominant society is based white supremacy, it makes it so that whiteness is “actively preferred” over Blackness (Hall 189).  Furthermore, Neal understands how popular and dominant cultures inform “the values, the life styles, and the feelings of the people,” so to change culture is to change society (Neal 48).  Because Neal’s unique view on the powerful, active role that culture plays in everyday life, he is able to posit how to create a culture free of white ideals.  Visual art, music, religion, and the self-expression of Black people are all forms that promote Black liberation and revolution.  Neal understands the power of culture in the same way that Stuart Hall does, and that in order for there to be a potent and cohesive revolution, a shared consciousness and language is necessary.

At its core, the goal of the avant-garde and Neal’s vision for the Black Arts movement try to achieve the same thing.  The avant-garde artists aims to change cultural perceptions and try to shock and provoke the viewer.  In the time that Neal was writing this manifesto, and even now, Black self-expression was shocking, uncomfortable, and was not accepted in the society.  It shocked white viewers to see Black people speaking for and defining themselves.  This shock, and this disruption of cultural norms, follows the framework of traditional avant-garde work.  How the Black Arts movement differs from most of the avant-garde movement is that it is not aiming to reach the elite white class.  Neal specifically states that the reason the Black literature is not effective in creating Black culture is because it panders too much to white audiences, trying to gain their acceptance, instead of trying to educate and inform other Black people.  The Black Arts movements aimed to change the collective consciousness of all Black people, in order to liberate them from oppressive white rule.  In perspective, we can see that Neal’s activism reflects that of a foco group within the Cuban Revolution, which we discussed in relation to the avant-garde.  Just as the guerilla fighters there were not focused on dealing within the system and alongside governmental officials, the Black Arts movement aimed to change the political consciousness of the general Black public.  
The Black Arts movement, under Larry Neal’s vision, aims to change the consciousness and the language with which Black people use to describe themselves.  Because Larry Neal is able to view the culture of the United States as active in its racism, he aims to create a counter narrative, where Black people are celebrated for being human.  In challenging popular culture in such a way, Neal acts as the master artist in the Black Power movement’s version of the avant-garde, focused on uplifting Black people over reaching the elite white class.
