---
layout: narrative
title: ACTIVIST ART AND POPULARITY
author: KAAVYA ARAKONI
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

Activist art has its roots in aesthetics, politics and economics, and this is no less true for the art and projects conducted by the Border Art Workshop/Taller de Arte Fronterizo (BAW/TAF). BAW/TAF is a particularly interesting case in activist art as they changed a lot of the language around undocumented immigrants and migration, particularly focusing on the US/Mexico border. Stuart Hall is a cultural theorist who was especially interested in popular culture and how it relates to what he describes as a “dominant culture” as well as its relation to society and politics. In this essay, I will discuss how Hall’s theories of popular culture relate to BAW/TAF, their border art projects and the role of “dominant culture” in changing the roots of border art. I will also discuss how Hall’s theories of popular culture relate to previous discussion we’ve had in class, including the role of the artist, and the significance of perceived power in understanding the popularity of two artworks, House and West Meets East.

Hall discusses a popular culture that is particularly focused on “those forms and activities which have their roots in the social and material conditions of particular classes,” which relates directly to BAW/TAF’s work with border art and their numerous projects trying to assuage the tensions relating to the borderlands. Border art was born on the US and Mexico border, and has its roots in the social, economic and political experiences of those who lived in the area or faced discrimination due to stereotypes of the region. BAW/TAF’s work often focused on “[linking] art’s political unconscious to politics’ aesthetic one” (Carroll, 225) and their aesthetic projects were primarily forwarding a political agenda. BAW/TAF’s ‘The End of the Line’ was a performative artwork that involved six Mexican artists and six American artists acting as various stereotypes and interacting with each other. The project brought to life the reality of a lot of Mexican and American people’s livelihoods and symbolized an amalgamation of the cultures while also highlighting the “social and material” (Hall) conditions of certain classes.

In defining popular culture, Hall also brings to attention the crucial “continuing tension” between popular and “dominant culture.” In REMEX: Toward an Art History of the NAFTA Era, Amy Carroll discusses the popularization of border art, “the 1980s-1990s art world was ‘discovering’ and classifying the ‘genres’ of border art, feminist art and art by people of color” (232). Her delicate apostrophe use only highlights the truth of what had begun to happen– the art world and foreign artists with no knowledge of life on the border were about to co-opt the work of marginalized people and transform it into artwork of the “dominant culture,” making it accessible for those who had no idea about the socioeconomic struggles that the artists were facing. This is also particularly relevant to BAW/TAF and one of its’ founders, Guillermo Gómez-Peña’s thoughts on the direction of border art. In Death on the Border, Gómez-Peña described border art as becoming a “casualty of a dominant culture that continues to ransack ideas, images, spiritual strength and exotic lifestyles from… its own Third World” (Carroll, 232). Through the re-classification and attempt to glean and co-opt various ideas from the artwork of those who have the lived experience of the borderlands, the art world was pushing border art into the classification of dominant culture.

In Conceptualism in Latin American Art, Luis Camnitzer discusses the role of the artist as agitator or constructor of culture. The artist as agitator is primarily attempting to “disseminate” an opinion, but is not as concerned with affecting permanent culture change (Camnitzer, 19). The artist as constructor on the other hand is primarily concerned with changing perceptions. Camnitzer specifies that the difference between the two comes down to the perceived power of the artist. He discusses how the “establishment feels much more threatened by agitation” (Camnitzer, 19) and speculates that this could be due to the fact that artist as constructor has institutional power which can be more easily controlled, whereas the artist as agitator draws their power from elsewhere and is therefore less predictable. In that case, what makes something popular? Is it influence and institutional power?

In Conversation Pieces, Grant Kester compares two artworks created around a similar time in similar neighborhoods in London. These two artworks are West Meets East (Loraine Leeson, 1992) and House (Rachel Whiteread, 1993). House drew a lot of popularity in the art world and whether it was intentional or not, it had its “roots in the social and material conditions” of the people who lived in one of the poorest neighborhoods in London (Hall). The people in the neighborhood were outraged, particularly by what seemed the lack of regard for those struggling to make ends meet and pay rent. However, House was actively preferred by art critics while West Meets East was essentially ignored. West Meets East intimately connected with the socioeconomic and political experience of the Bangladeshi immigrants, however it did not translate to the artwork of “popular culture” because it did not represent the “dominant culture” (Hall). Furthermore, Whiteread had institutional power, whereas Leeson and the Bangladeshi girls she worked with did not. In this sense, the ‘establishment’ that might have felt threatened could have been the art world, unable to come to terms with the extremely visible socioeconomic influences on West Meets East and its lack of opacity and unambiguity.

Stuart Hall’s theories on popular culture are useful in understanding activist art and the tension it has with “dominant culture.” His theories can be applied specifically to the case of BAW/TAF, an activist group that primarily focused on the US-Mexico border and those affected by it. Hall’s theories can also be applied more broadly to the avant-garde art realm as well as Camnitzer’s theories on the role of the artist in a cultural sense. Finally, it is useful to consider what makes art popular or a fixture of “dominant culture” and how the role of power plays into this.
