---
layout: narrative
title: On Defining Black Esthetics Through Cultural Change
author: Kieran Huang
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

Stuart Hall’s definition of ‘popular culture’ can help us analyze the Black Power, and more specifically Black Arts Movement. According to Hall, the popular culture exists as a manifestation of class struggle in which popular culture is in dialectic with dominant culture. Certainly the Black Arts Movement is birthed out of class difference, and art is its medium by which it articulates itself. Often popular culture can bear some resemblance or influence dominant culture, however, much of the intentionality of the Black Arts Movement is self-definition and self-determination. Through this mode of cultural creation, the Black Arts Movement makes more explicit the class difference which is not exposed in dominant culture. Furthermore, the Black Arts Movement aligns itself with Pan-Africanism, Third Worldist struggle, and movements addressing global systems rather than bordered ones. It is this shared cultural sensibility and identity formed through experiential class struggle that defines the esthetic and rhetoric of the Black Arts Movement.

Even though art’s esthetic as a principle is based on the idea of finding beauty in nature and experientially relating to art, its conceptual lineage operates through cultural dominance and hegemony and exists anti-thetically to its own defining. In redefining esthetic, there needs to be a redefining of the philosophical and moral systems behind it. It is this tainted estheticized view that creates tainted self-identifications for Black Americans. Defined by W.E.B. DuBois as “Double Consciousness,” Black people view themselves through contradictory lenses in self-identification and the “looking at one’s self through the eyes of others” (Neal, 41). It is the goal of the Black Arts Movement to give total vision of oneself not on the basis of the biases and stereotypes of the dominant culture.

Larry Neal uses the example of Black music, specifically that of blues as the “highest artistic achievement” (Neal, 42). For Neal Black music and blues signify ideas of the Black church. The Black church then acts as an organizational institution that collects the energy and memories of the past. Blues acts as a mediator between the “raw realities” and “spiritual and ritual energy of the church”. Blues’ poetics immerse themselves with experiential truths of daily life and struggle. It is interesting that Neal considers Blues and the Black church so highly. One could argue that the Black church exists in a dominant cultural framework in that Christianity has been an oppressive and colonial power, and therefore would be antithetical to the rejection of dominant belief systems. It is interesting that Neal doesn’t contend for avant-garde modes of Black art, since the avant-garde also aims to disrupt hegemonic and dominant narratives. Blues is accessible and non-opaque, so to what extent does it fit into the framework of radical redefining?

Comparatively I will look at Junk Art, a collection of found art made from the rubble and leftover artifacts of the Watts Riots, Junk Art was created by artist Noah Purifoy, although includes art from multiple artists. Junk Art works in an avant-garde framework. It challenges the viewer to reassess discarded objects, imagine their representative memory, and what memory has been lost. Junk Art addresses the class struggle and pain while also being in a dialectic with the dominant culture. The materials of Junk Art are reappropriated from dominant culture. Any pragmatic or other esthetic meanings of the art are jumbled in collage. Through these images Junk Art experientially shows the underlying violence and hegemonic structures behind cultural normalcy.

Maybe the difficulty in pinning down Black esthetic, is that conceptually, there is no one Black aesthetic. Clearly Neal’s dissection of music and poetry are a specific mode of his theoretical model of Black esthetics, which is why it differs so much from something like Junk Art. Part of the hegemony of cultural dominance is the burden of representation, the idea that there is a unified belief system or ideology in rebelling against cultural dominance. Daniel Widener uses examples of theatre as leading the expression of the Black Arts Movement, and even within this singular form their wass a multitude of methods to creating and advancing Black art from avant-garde redefining to the appropriation of the dominant theater practices by bringing them to Black communities.

It is also important to mention that another component of the Black esthetic in regards to the Black Arts Movement was inherently and deliberately political. The Black power organizations used art as part of their political engagement. The Black Panther Party, like that of the Tupamaros, used estheticized rhetoric to expose the hypocrisy and mock the inhumane bureaucratic indifference. They used community programs such as community food distribution to show the underlying morals. Art worked similarly as the funding of creative expression could only reasonably be seen as positive community building. Through organizational work as well as relating to other large contemporary movements (such as the Vietnam War protests) the Black Arts Movement was able to make cultural connections between individual identity and greater class collective struggles. In doing so, each individual is asked to join the collective in rebelling against the culturally dominant. As Widener writes, “ the revolutionary project of cultural transformation” was a “global effort that inspired the world over” and works “across genres and occurring at both community and national levels” (Widener, 38).

Widener uses the term ‘creative survival’ to discuss the way in which cultural transformation and rebellion against cultural dominance was a necessity. This is shown through the organizational work, especially that of the Black Panthers, in which freedom of expression is freedom from political and social hegemony. While I personally tend to find the radical rejection of avant-garde the most favorable, it is clear that the Black esthetic exists as multitudes of methods of expression that while differing greatly, are also all simultaneously interlinked in a dialectic of global class struggle. What is interesting to then question is how cultural dominance works on a spectrum. How is cultural dominance treated within the Black esthetic philosophies, how does it then respond to intersectional identities and struggles?
