---
layout: narrative
title: Junk Art and the Discussion of Popular
author: Liya Harris-Harrell
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

In creating a new definition of ‘Popular,’ Hall focuses on the concepts of how culture exists in a vacuum based on how it relates to subordinate or dominant ideas. How in Hall’s definition of popular there is more of a concept of malleability than in previous definitions related to the word. In other definitions related to the word, it focuses on how it is based on majority opinion; while Hall seems to move away from popular having to be dependent on majority opinion.

In relation to Hall’s concept of ‘popular,’ I plan to look at the Junk Art project that formed out of the debris of the Watts Riots. These pieces utilized debris and scraps that were left behind after the riot.  The artist who formed the idea about the project, Noah Purifoy and Judson Powell, originally interacted with the byproducts of the Watts Riot soon after it had ended. Stating that “ we ventured into the rubble like other junkers of the community, digging and searching, but unlike others, obsessed without quite knowing why” (Junk Art, p.3). Eventually these materials would become a part of a project labeled  “66 Neon Signs” in reference to some of the original pieces created from neon signs. Overall, this project becomes a focus on the materials used and how the artists were able to gain access to materials such as these. By using these specific materials they were able to make a statement about political and economic situation that led to these materials being accessible in the first place. (East of Borneo, 2019)

Hall’s framework on popular and popular culture provides an interesting lens to look at in relation to why Purifoy and Judson may have taken these materials and created the work that they did in response to the Watts Riot. The process of using found materials for art pieces was not a new one when the two artist began collecting the different objects from the wreckage of the community. These pieces a part of 66 signs were in themselves an act going against the dominant culture as it related to arts education. “…66 signs began as an expression of the necessity for art education, affirming the importance of this avenue of self-expression to individuals in the community of Watts.” (Junk Art, p. 6) According to the author of “The Art of Communication as a Creative Art,” that art education focused on recreation and that this is seen as not being valuable when in actuality it is vital for learning art. By taking this concept of recreation in relation to the use of found materials it would provide the community—whether they an artist or not—the opportunity to express themselves after the tragedy that was the Watts Riots. The idea of popular, in Hall’s definition, helps better understand the original thought process behind why Puriofy and Powell found that it was necessary to find meaning out of these objects that they found to be interesting and worth saving.  “We wish to establish that there must be more to art than the creative act, more than the sensation of beauty, ugliness, color, form, light, sound, darkness, intrigue, wonderment, uncanniness, bitter, sweet, black, white, life and  death” (Junk Art, p. 9) 66 signs as a means to push the boundaries of creativity beyond what common conceptions of creativity are in itself fought to bring art by definition outside of the dominant idea of what art and creativity encompassed on a scale outside of the context of the Watts Riot as the specific material related to it.

Hall’s ideas of popular can be related to both the ideas of self-definition, self-determination, and the definition of avant-garde. Avant-Garde is based on the need to use art to disrupt tradition or the mainstream. The concept of Avant-Garde has become how artist challenge society. The use of it to disrupt complacency in the individual can take place on a small scale within the art community or a larger scale of  challenging societal complacency. This idea of ‘popular’ proposed by Hall gives support as to why artist would want to disrupt the status quo. As the status quo like the dominant culture needs some form of disruption in order to create conversation and change. In addition, this framework calls on this concept of process and how malleable the concept of what is popular may become.  The ability for ideas to change and shape in relation to mass culture is one constant in many of the concepts that relate to art that challenges the dominant ideas surrounding art and society.

In addition to Avant-Garde, Hall’s ideas on popular and popular culture relate to the idea of self-definition and self-determination. Hall’s ideas of process adds interesting dialogue between how ideas may need to develop and change to fit  a more accurate representation outside of dominant culture. Present in the understanding of self-expression and reinvention that was highlighted in the pieces a part of “66 signs”, these terms become about defining oneself or one’s own community outside of the ideas of the dominant culture. It “…teaches us that we must make a place…for ourselves, and that we must construct, through struggle, a world that is compatible with our highest visions.” (Neal, p. 39) When artist use self-definition they are changing how they define the culture from how a dominant class may view it. Specifically in the 66 signs this rose in redefining the value of the found items that were lost in the outcome of the Watts Riot. These artist gave a new meaning to these objects as they crafted them into art that made statements about the nature of the community following the riots and cause for conversations to come out of viewing these pieces. Furthermore self-determination relates to this idea of popular through the communal changes  that are attempted across cultures. Such that Hall’s ideas focus on a larger population redefining what popular culture is in relation to dominant culture; and, both ideas try to extend pass an isolated definition or way of changing what is already being considered commonplace or the norm.

Overall, Hall’s framework adds a supportive viewpoint of concepts that have previously been discussed in terms of expanding how individuals and groups attempt to change the world. As it adds to understanding a wider lens of the ways in which changing the norm is not limited to redefining the ways in which people think about ideas in relation to a larger societal picture.  

References
Neal,L. Any Day Now: Black Art and Black Liberation.
"The Oddity of Found Things | 66 Signs of Neon Catalog." (2019). Retrieved from https://eastofborneo.org/archives/the-oddity-of-found-things-66-signs-of-neon-catalog/
