---
layout: narrative
title: End of the Line, Shattering Stereotypes
author: Louise Rosler
date: 10 October 2019
week: two
---

Border Art Workshop/Taller de Arte Fronterizo (BAW/TAF) undertook many art forms during their Border Art Workshop from 1984-1985 that specifically addressed the reality of US-Mexico Border Issues. With each piece, the binational group strove to create a dialogue that questioned conceptions of power and borders, inciting a new imagining of life sans this international border. End of the Line is a piece that stood out specifically as a clear example of cross-cultural conversation. Drawing on Stuart Hall’s theory of ‘popular culture,’ I argue that End of the Line functions as a representation of the cultural dialectic between ‘dominant’ and ‘popular’ culture. It challenged demonizing images induced by the media as well as the “autonomous ‘art’ object of the nation-state on the open market,” by shining a light on stereotyping as a process that reinforces this hegemony (227). Ultimately, this new knowledge liberated participants and observers from the one-sided narrative of the media.

It is valuable to conceptualize End of the Line in context. The dialogue that was occurring at this time labeled immigrants, specifically Mexicans, as “undesirable aliens” and blamed them for the “overburdened welfare state” and created discomfort around the “assault on US culture and family” (228). End of the Line attempted to combat this rhetoric by facilitating a new dialogue. Each aspect of the performance embodied cross-cultural/cross-border knowledge-sharing. It was organized at Border Field Park/Las Playas de Tijuana-- the point of convergence between Tijuana, San Diego, and the Pacific Ocean. Because of this, the performance was quite literally occurring across borders. In addition to the physical symbolism, the site is a significant component of the piece because it was a “key site for the visualization of unsecure borders” (228). The performance highlighted the arbitrary nature of the border, and also created new depictions of the border. Each side of the border fence was lined with six mirrors, with one actor standing in front of each mirror. The “cast of characters” on the Mexican side of the border included:  “El Taxi” (The Taxi Driver), “La Criada” (The Housekeeper), “La Facil” (The Easy), “El Vato” (The Homeboy), “El Nopal” (The Cactus), and “El Indio” (The Indian or Indigenous). The U.S. side included: “El Surfer” (The Surfer), “La Turista” (The Tourist), “La Punk” (The Punk Rocker), “El Marine” (The Marine), “La Migra” (The Border Patrol Agent), “El Obispo” (The Bishop). By visually representing “campy” stereotypes perpetuated by the media, the performance highlighted their absurdity. In theory, struck with new visions of reality, participants and observers were freed to think for themselves rather than blindly believe the media’s narrative.

The goal of End of the Line was to “dismantle preconceived widely circulated truisms about the region” (230). Stuart Hall’s theory of ‘popular culture’ reflects this continual conversation and reconceptualization of relations between “dominant and subordinate formations.” He notes the importance of interacting forms and activities that are embedded in traditions and practices. In the context of End of the Line, it is important to recognize not only the content of the media’s messages, but how they are delivered. The biased commentary of the media may have told people explicitly what to think, but underlying structures, presentation, and distribution of this information also communicated power relations that influenced thought. The media’s forms and activities cannot be separated from the domination that it holds--it operates with a monopoly on conceptions of truth. It is constantly being informed by political, economic, or social forces; these forces validate it in the eyes of the public, but, as End of the Line points out, they should be calls for further examination. End of the Line reclaims media stereotypes, ‘dethroning’ the hegemony of the media in truth. In addition to addressing the media’s role, End of the Line forces the observer to think about power in terms of who is permitted to cross the border. When the former First Lady, the “media coverage neither condemned nor condoned Nixon’s flagrant disrespect of an international border” (228). Yet, immigrants were demonized and wrongly accused for burdening U.S. welfare, filling the U.S. labor pool, and harming U.S. culture. There is a clear relationship between power and portrayal, with specific portrayals justified on account of political, social, racial, and economic conditions. The border was a space where the tension of all of these conditions culminated, making it the perfect site for disruption.

Stuart Hall’s emphasis of disruption centered on ‘the people,’ or the masses. Hall posits that ‘popular culture’ is an arena in which marginalized folx can participate in dialogue, and in this way, “relations of dominance and subordination are articulated” (Hall). The ‘popular’ is a site of opposition and cultural struggle. This ideology draws in particular on theories of self-definition and self-determination. Similarly to the concept of ‘popular culture,’ self definition--or the idea that people should have their own modes of presenting and perceiving themselves--allows for conversation with dominant culture. Self-definition challenges hegemonic conceptions of culture. Self-determination refers to people’s need for control and agency over their own lives, centering struggle and survival in this vision. Hall’s ‘popular culture’ arena provides a site for self-determination of marginalized folx. In the context of End of the Line, BAW/TAF created a space outside of the rigidity of a museum where the artists could incite conversation about injustice without the burden of critic/curator assessment. In the performance, folx of diverse identities collaborated to facilitate an unlearning of stereotypes. Behing this was the hope of creating new definitions for “who and what constituted the undocumented, expanding the circumference of the term beyond its stock attachments to the nouns “worker” and “entrant”” (226).

The call to transform our visions of the self and others was a central aspect of End of the Line.  By shedding light on stereotypes that were perpetuated by the media, End of the Line constructed a space for people to redefine their relationships with each other. This is a crucial step in the process of shifting structures of power.
